 WORLD TRADE                                                                       TN/RL/GEN/10
                                                                                   14 July 2004
 ORGANIZATION
                                                                                   (04-3031)

 Negotiating Group on Rules                                                        Original: English



                                                   REVIEWS1

        Communication from Brazil; Chile; Colombia; Costa Rica; Hong Kong, China; Israel;
          Japan; Korea; Norway; Singapore; Switzerland; Separate Customs Territory of
                         Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; and Thailand

        The following communication, dated 24 May 2004, is being circulated at the request of the
Delegations of Brazil; Chile; Colombia; Costa Rica; Hong Kong, China; Israel; Japan; Korea;
Norway; Singapore; Switzerland; Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and
Matsu; and Thailand.

       The submitting delegations have requested that this paper, which was submitted to the Rules
Negotiating Group as an informal document (JOB(04)/59), also be circulated as a formal document.

                                                _______________

I.        BASIC PRINCIPLE

       • There shall be clear and objective rules applicable to reviews under Article 9.3, 9.5 and 11.2
         of AD Agreement.
       • The same rules applied to the original investigation shall be applied to reviews, whenever
         applicable.

II.       PROBLEM OF THE CURRENT AD AGREEMENT

       • The current AD Agreement does not clearly articulate the concepts, procedures and
         methodologies applicable to reviews under Article 9.3 (anti-dumping duty assessment),
         Article 9.5 (new shipper reviews) and Article 11.2 (revocation reviews). The lack of explicit
         rules makes it possible for the authorities to arbitrarily introduce rules, procedures, and
         methodologies into these reviews that differ substantially from those in the original
         investigations and thereby place an undue burden on the respondent. Such practices are also
         pursued to artificially inflate the calculated dumping margins and/or to continue to impose an
         anti-dumping duty that is not necessary to offset dumping.

III.      AMENDMENT

Issue 1: Rules applied to Reviews

          Proposal:

        Clarify that the provisions of Articles 2 (Determination of Dumping), 3 (Determination of
Injury), 4 (Definition of Domestic Industry), 5 (Initiation and Subsequent Investigation), and 6

          1
              This issue has been referred to by Members in documents TN/RL/W/1, 4, 7, 10, 47, 66, 72, 83, 86 and
138.
TN/RL/GEN/10
Page 2


(Evidence) shall apply to the reviews, whenever applicable, under Articles 9.3, 9.5 and 11.2, with the
exception of the specific rules concerning these reviews. In particular, the de minimis rule and/or its
threshold in Article 5.8 should be applied to these reviews to the extent that it is appropriate. In any
case, the de minimis threshold should be applied to duty assessment conducted under Article 9.3. In
addition, the same methodology that was applied to the original investigation for comparison between
the normal price and the export price as stipulated in Article 2.4.2 should be applied to these reviews
unless a different methodology is requested by the exporters

        Explanation:

    •   The importance of establishing multilateral control applies not only to the original
        investigation, but also with equal force to all the subsequent phases of an anti-dumping
        procedure, including the various reviews provided for in Articles 9 and 11.

    •   However, Articles 9 and 11, per se, do not contain detailed substantive provisions governing
        the conduct of the reviews provided for in those Articles. This has resulted in the application
        of arbitrary rules by many Members and to the inability of the WTO to establish multilateral
        control with respect to the application of these Articles seen in conjunction with other
        substantive and procedural provisions. Thus, the detailed substantive provisions of the ADA,
        in particular those contained in Articles 2-6, should apply not only to the original
        investigation, but also to the Articles 9 and 11 reviews whenever applicable.

    •   In fact, it should be pointed out that some WTO Members apply the same rules to reviews.
        For example, a relevant regulation of a WTO Member reads; “the relevant provisions of this
        Regulation with regard to procedures and the conduct of investigations, excluding those
        relating to time limits, shall apply to any review carried out pursuant to paragraphs 2, 3, and 4
        [governing sunset, changed circumstances, and newcomer reviews].”2 (emphasis added.)

    •   The comparison methodology stipulated in Article 2.4.2 is a useful discipline to prevent a
        possible source of distortion in the calculation of the dumping margin. Without such a
        discipline, there is a possibility that Members might apply an arbitrary methodology regarding
        the comparison of the normal value and the export price, resulting in an unjustified finding of
        dumping or a bloated margin of dumping. Article 2.4.2 should apply to Article 9.3 reviews
        even under the current Agreement, in light of the chapeau of Article 9.3 which provides that
        "the amount of the anti-dumping duty shall not exceed the margin of dumping as established
        under Article 2." If Article 2.4.2 does not apply to Article 9.3, and consequently authorities
        may 'zero' dumping margins in average to transaction comparisons, this will result in a duty
        calculation exceeding the margin of dumping as established under Article 2. This point must
        be clarified and stipulated in precise form.

    •   The current de minimis standard of 2 per cent for dumping margins is set out in Article 5.8.
        There is no reason why this standard should not be applied to reviews to the extent that it is
        appropriate. In fact, the 2 per cent de minimis standard is used in reviews by some WTO
        Members, including the EC.3




        2
            Article 11(5) of EC’s Basic Regulation.
        3
            See Article 11(9) of the Basic Regulation.
                                                                                        TN/RL/GEN/10
                                                                                               Page 3


Issue 2: Request for Article 9.3 Review

        Proposal:

        Clarify that the request for Article 9.3 reviews can only be made by exporters or importers.

        Explanation:

    •   Article 9.3 sets forth the procedures for determining the amount of refund from the deposited
        or collected anti-dumping duty. Whether or not the deposit is made by the importer or by the
        exporter of the product subject to a measure, the refund-procedure exclusively relates to these
        interested parties and not to the domestic industry. It is, therefore, natural to set forth that
        only the importer or the exporter may request Article 9.3 reviews. Indeed, neither the
        domestic industry nor the authorities have interests in the refund of the AD duty.
        Furthermore, if an Article 9.3 review can be initiated upon the request of the domestic
        industry, it can be used to harass importers and exporters because the review imposes
        substantial administrative and economic burdens.

Issue 3: Import Period for Dumping Margin under Article 9.3

        Proposal:

       Clarify that the margin of dumping in an Article 9.3 review shall be based on all imports from
   a specific exporter that were entered into the importing Member for not less than one year, and not
   on an individual import basis.

        Explanation:

    •   Article 9.3 does not provide the period of imports for which the margin of dumping shall be
        calculated in a review. This ambiguity allows the authorities to calculate the margin of
        dumping on an individual import basis in a review, and consequently, allows the authorities to
        use a dumping margin calculation methodology that is substantially different from the
        methodology in the original investigation. In an original investigation, the authorities are
        required to calculate the margin of dumping based on the sales and cost data for a certain
        period of time, normally for one year. The margin of dumping in an Article 9.3 review,
        therefore, should also be calculated with respect to all imports as a whole, and not with
        respect to an individual import and/or not for a period of less than one year. This clarification
        also will contribute to increased transparency and predictability of reviews under Article 9.3.

Issue 4: Review Periods

        Proposal:

        Improve the rule so that the reviews are not unfairly extended to the prejudice of the
responding parties. To this end, clarify (1) that reviews under Articles 9.3 and 11.2 must be
completed within 12 months, (2) that authorities are encouraged to pay interest at a reasonable rate if
duties are not refunded within 90 days following the completion of the review and (3) that reviews
under Article 9.5 must be completed within 9 months after the date on which a request for a review
has been made, unless an extension of the procedure is requested by the new shipper.
TN/RL/GEN/10
Page 4


        Explanation:

    •   Although Article 11.4 states that reviews should “normally” be concluded within 12 months,
        too often authorities do not complete the review in a year. Twelve months should be
        sufficient to conduct a review under Articles 9.3 and 11.2 and provide an answer to
        respondents about their possibilities to trade in a foreign market.

    •   When the authorities do not promptly return duties wrongly collected from respondents
        within 90 days, they should be encouraged to pay a reasonable rate of interest to the
        respondents, as if the respondents had been refunded their duties, within the time-frame
        provided for in the Agreement.

    •   Although Article 9.5 states that new shipper reviews shall be carried out on an accelerated
        basis, there have been many instances where these reviews have not been completed on such
        a basis. A more specific time-period should be applied to avoid the unjustifiable
        circumstance for new shippers who have not exported and are not related to any of the
        exporters and producers subject to the anti-dumping duties on the product. In special
        circumstances, a longer period for the review may be necessary, but in any case no more than
        12 months. It is also important to set a time-limit for the Authorities to initiate new shipper
        reviews after the date on which a request for a review has been made. In addition, it seems to
        be necessary to define requirement conditions for such a request.

Issue 5: Assessment of Dumping and “Likelihood of Injury” under Article 11.2

        Proposal:

       Clarify, through the development of harmonized indicative lists relating to the assessment of
dumping and the “likelihood of injury” under Article 11.2, that the burden of proof is on those parties
advocating the continuation of the antidumping order.

         As for the assessment of dumping, the following points shall be included in the harmonized
indicative list; (1) dumping margins to be considered are those based on current market conditions and
pricing, not the pricing during the period of the original investigation; and (2) in case the measure is
subject to reviews after the original measure, the authorities shall rely on the margin found in the most
recent review; (3) if no dumping margin has been found, the “likelihood of injury” test shall not apply
and the measure shall be terminated.

        As for the assessment of the “likelihood of injury”, the following points shall be included in
the harmonized indicative list; (1) the likelihood of injury caused by the imports shall be based on the
current competitive circumstances of the domestic industry and the relevant exporters, and not on
information from the original investigation; (2) the authorities shall conduct their examination in
accordance with Article 3 of the ADA, based on facts, and not merely on allegation, conjecture or
speculation. (3) The determination made by the authorities whether the continuation of the
antidumping duty is warranted or not, shall be based on the current volume of the dumped imports.

        Explanation:

    •   Article 11.2 does not provide a guideline for the assessment of dumping and the likelihood
        assessment of injury. As a consequence, Members have developed widely differing standards
        for the assessment, undermining the ability of the WTO to maintain discipline on revocation
        reviews. Therefore, the present situation calls for the development of harmonized indicative
        lists.
                                                                                    TN/RL/GEN/10
                                                                                           Page 5



    -    In the practice of certain Members, the determination of whether the anti-dumping duty
         is no longer warranted is often based on the unsubstantiated assumption that, if the
         measure were terminated, the exporters would revert to the export price prior to the
         imposition of the measure. Such unsubstantiated assumptions are made, even though
         Article 11.2 does not provide for the use of a “likelihood test” for dumping. In fact,
         Article 11.2 provides for the “likelihood test” exclusively with respect to the injury. In
         addition, Members following this practice require the exporters to demonstrate that,
         irrespective of the termination of the measure, they will not revert to the old price.

    -    There is no basis for such an interpretation of Article 11.2. It also reverses the burden of
         proof, as pursuant to Article 11.2, it is not the respondents that should demonstrate that
         the termination of the measure is not likely to lead to continuation or recurrence of
         dumping.

•   For this reason, in all cases, including where there has been no import since the imposition of
    the measure, it should be made clear in the harmonized indicative list that the presumption is
    that the termination of measure will not lead to continuation or recurrence of dumping.

    -    The indicative list should make it clear that the authorities or domestic industries bear
         the burden to demonstrate that there in fact is likelihood of continuation or recurrence of
         injury.

                                         __________
