 WORLD TRADE                                                                  TN/RL/GEN/8
                                                                              14 July 2004
 ORGANIZATION
                                                                              (04-3028)

 Negotiating Group on Rules                                                   Original: English



                                   PROHIBITION OF ZEROING1

        Communication from Brazil; Chile; Colombia; Costa Rica; Hong Kong, China; Israel;
           Japan; Korea; Mexico; Norway; Singapore; Switzerland; Separate Customs
                  Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; and Thailand

        The following communication, dated 24 May 2004, is being circulated at the request of the
Delegations of Brazil; Chile; Colombia; Costa Rica; Hong Kong, China; Israel; Japan; Korea;
Mexico; Norway; Singapore; Switzerland; Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen
and Matsu; and Thailand.

       The submitting delegations have requested that this paper, which was submitted to the Rules
Negotiating Group as an informal document (JOB(04)/57), also be circulated as a formal document.

                                            _______________

I.        BASIC PRINCIPLE

       • An AD investigation shall determine whether imports from an exporter or producer of a
         product as a whole have been dumped in the importing market, NOT whether there are
         individual sales of that product or models of that product, which have been sold below normal
         value.
       • A “fair comparison” should be done between export prices of all comparable transactions and
         normal value.
       • Thus, "Zeroing" must be prohibited in all methods of comparison and in all AD proceedings,
         and a single dumping margin should be calculated for the entire period of investigation.

II.       PROBLEM OF THE CURRENT AD AGREEMENT

       • Although the above-mentioned basic principle is embodied in the current AD Agreement,
         there exist disagreements among Members over the scope and extent of the prohibition of
         "zeroing".

III.      AMENDMENT

1.        Prohibit the Practice of “Zeroing” in the Calculation of Dumping Margins in All AD
          Proceedings

          Proposal:

       Amend Article 2.4.2 to explicitly provide that regardless of the basis of the comparison of
export prices to normal value (i.e. weighted average-to-weighted average or transaction-to-

          1
          This issue has been referred to by Members in documents TN/RL/W/6, 20, 22, 25, 26, 28, 45, 66, 72,
113, 119 and 141.
                                                                                                         . /.
TN/RL/GEN/8
Page 2


transaction, or weighted average-to-transaction), all positive margins of dumping and negative
margins of dumping found on imports from an exporter or producer of the product subject to
investigation or review must be added up.

        Further amend the first sentence of Article 2.4.2 to clarify that the Article applies to initial
investigations and all subsequent reviews under Articles 9 and 11.2

        Explanation:

        These proposals are intended to clarify that regardless of the basis of the comparison
methodology used by particular authorities, positive margins of dumping and negative margins of
dumping must be added up in the determination of the margin of dumping for the imports of the
product as a whole in both the initial investigations and subsequent reviews.

2.      Clarify That A Single Margin of Dumping Must Be Calculated for the Entire Period of
        Investigation or Review.

        Proposal:

        Add a provision to Article 2.4 clarifying that, regardless of the comparison methodology, if
margins of dumping are determined separately for imports during multiple portions of the entire
period of an investigation or review, the margin of dumping to be determined in the investigation or
review must be a single margin of dumping for all imports during the entire period of investigation or
review.

        Explanation:

         It is possible to effect “zeroing” by subdividing the period of investigation or review and
calculating separate margins for each such period (e.g. month, quarter, semi-annual). Calculating
margins for subdivided periods separately and not offsetting the positive margins with negative
margins for the entire period of investigation or review can have the same effect as zeroing. The fact
that an exporter is dumping in some portion of the period of investigation or review, but has no
margin of dumping on exports as a whole during the full period of investigation or review, does not
justify finding margins of dumping.


                                                 __________




        2
            This proposal is also related to our previous proposal on reviews, WT/RL/W/83 (25 April 2003).
