 WORLD TRADE                                                              TN/RL/GEN/28
                                                                          2 December 2004
 ORGANIZATION
                                                                          (04-5247)

 Negotiating Group on Rules                                               Original: English



         PROPOSAL ON ISSUES RELATING TO THE DETERMINATION OF INJURY
                         UNDER ARTICLE 3 OF THE ADA

     Communication from Brazil; Chile; Colombia; Costa Rica; Hong Kong, China; Israel; Japan;
     Korea, Rep. of; Norway; Singapore; Switzerland; the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan,
                             Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; and Thailand


       The following communication, dated 30 November 2004, is being circulated at the request of
the Delegations of Brazil; Chile; Colombia; Costa Rica; Hong Kong, China; Israel; Japan;
Korea, Rep. of; Norway; Singapore; Switzerland; the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan,
Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; and Thailand.

       The submitting delegations have requested that this paper, which was submitted to the Rules
Negotiating Group as an informal document (JOB(04)/183), also be circulated as a formal document.

                                          _______________


I.       DESCRIPTION OF THE PROBLEMS

A.       MATERIAL INJURY

(1)      Definition of Material Injury:

        Different authorities have applied different thresholds for determining material injury and the
determination of the existence of material injury by the same authority can differ from case to case.
The only attempt at defining the magnitude of injury necessary to make an affirmative determination
is contained in footnote 9 to Article 3 which references “material” without further elaboration. In
order to ensure consistency among Members in applying the injury standard of the ADA and to avoid
imposition of antidumping measures in the absence of any meaningful extent of injury to the domestic
industry, the definition of material injury should be clarified.

(2)      Determination of Material Injury:

         As currently constructed, Article 3 is confusing in terms of the relationship of the two
determinations which must be made, namely that the domestic industry in the importing country must
be injured and that the injury must be caused by the dumped imports. The current ambiguity leaves
open the possibility that the two concepts are mixed thereby making it difficult to determine whether
injury is viewed as a threshold issue separate from the issue of the cause of the injury. It could also
allow the application of a lower standard of injury in cases where the causal relationship between the
injury and the imports may be strong, but the injury itself may not be material. On the other hand,
some authorities make separate and distinct determination of injury and causation. Without
prejudging how authorities make their determinations of injury and causation, we believe that the
existence of injury to the domestic industry in the importing country is an essential element of any
TN/RL/GEN/28
Page 2


determination under Article 3 and that in the absence of the material injury, the strength of the causal
relationship between dumped imports and any injury to the domestic industry is not relevant. We
believe that Article 3 should be clarified to make this clear.

B.       CAUSATION

(1)      Injury Caused by Dumped Imports:

       Article 3.5 is ambiguous in terms of the relationship between the injury being experienced by
the domestic industry in the importing country and the dumped imports. We believe that any
ambiguity in the ADA should be eliminated by clarifying that dumped imports must, in and of
themselves, apart from any other factors that may also be causing injury, be causing injury to the
domestic industry in the importing country.

(2)      Correlation Analysis:

         Members may take different approaches to determining whether there is a causal relationship
between dumped imports and injury to the domestic industry in the importing country. For example,
in some cases authorities may rely heavily on qualitative rather than quantitative factors or vary the
weight given to one over the other. In other cases, authorities may rely on sophisticated econometric
models or economic theory developed in other areas of law, such as competition policy. The one
analysis which is easily performed by authorities and which the Appellate Body has endorsed is the
so-called analysis of the correlation or coincidence between imports, factors other than imports and
injury to the domestic industry. While other analyses may affect the outcome of any individual case
(for example, there may be a strong correlation between imports and injury to the domestic industry in
the importing country which is independent of any dumping but caused by a shift in consumer
preference for the imported product over the domestic product for technological reasons), it is
important both to encourage the use of correlation analysis and to ensure that it is applied in a uniform
manner.

         We see two issues relating to traditional correlation or coincidence analyses (i.e. does the
volume or price trends of the dumped imports coincide or correlate with the injury to the domestic
industry) which should be addressed in the ADA. First, where there is not a correlation or only a
weak correlation between volume or price trends of dumped imports and injury, authorities should
have other compelling evidence which nevertheless demonstrates the link between dumped imports
and injury in order to make a finding that dumped imports are causing injury. Second, where there is
a correlation not only between dumped imports and injury, but also between one or more other factors
and injury, the non attribution analysis required in Article 3.5 becomes even more important and
should be subject to even more exacting standards to avoid unwarranted finding that dumped imports
are causing injury.

(3)      Non-attribution rule - Pricing Analysis:

        An additional area of concern regarding causation relates to the pricing analyses undertaken
by authorities and the extent to which these analyses can and do show price suppression and/or
depression. Of particular concern are situations where multiple countries are involved in an
investigation or there are multiple producers in the domestic industry and authorities undertake a
pricing analysis exclusively based on average prices of imports or domestic products. Use of
averages can, in fact, mask the true pricing dynamics in the market and the source of pricing pressures
on the domestic industry. Such a problem can be seen in the following two illustrative examples:

•     Example 1: In the steel market of an importing country, low capital and raw material costs
      permitted so-called minimills to gain market share through aggressive pricing, while still
                                                                                         TN/RL/GEN/28
                                                                                                Page 3


      maintaining adequate profit margins. Arguably, these minimills were the price leaders in the
      market, not the imports. However, unless one examined individual mill prices or average
      minimill prices separate from average prices of all domestic producers, this market dynamic was
      hidden. The fact that average import prices were below average domestic prices was really not
      relevant in terms of the source of pricing pressure in that market. If one separated the pricing of
      the segment of the domestic production gaining market share (i.e. minimills) from the segment
      losing market share (integrated mills) and compared the former with import prices, it would show
      that the lowest prices in the market (and presumably those putting pressure on prices) were the
      prices of the minimills. A comparison of average-to-average prices would hide this important
      fact.
•     Example 2: In the domestic market of an importing country, one of the domestic producers
      promoted its aggressive pricing by providing its customers with comparative pricing for both the
      other domestic manufacturer and the major import brand, showing that its prices are lower. While
      a simple comparison of average domestic and import prices may show some underselling by
      imports, this methodology masks the fact that the price leader in the market was that particular
      domestic producer and not the dumped imports.

C.        REASONED EXPLANATION

        The current ADA requires the authorities to state “reasons” for the final injury determination1,
but does not explicitly require any type of explanation or explain what may constitute a reasoned
explanation. Without such an explanation, however, it is impossible to determine whether each of the
relevant factors has been appropriately evaluated, how the evaluation was undertaken, and how the
authority reached its conclusion based on the analysis of all factors. The ADA should explicitly
require that authorities provide such an explanation.

II.       ELEMENTS OF A SOLUTION

A.        MATERIAL INJURY

Proposal 1: Definition of Material Injury

          The following definition should be added to Article 3:

          “The term ‘material injury’ means injury as demonstrated by an important and
          measurable deterioration in the overall operating performance of the domestic
          industry.”

Explanation:

         While Article 3.4 articulates the factors to be examined in determining the state of the
domestic industry, it neither provides a benchmark for determining injury nor a framework for
analyzing the factors. Similarly, while footnote 9 attempts to define injury, it does not do so either by
specific reference to the factors in Article 3.4 or by establishing a framework for the analysis. Finally,
nowhere in Article 3 is there an attempt to articulate a benchmark against which to measure the
existence or absence of injury. Virtually all of the factors mentioned in Article 3.4 reflect on
operating performance of the industry alleged to be injured. Therefore, it is appropriate to define
material injury by reference to the operating performance and a deterioration in the operating
performance.


          1
              See Article 12.2.2 of the ADA.
TN/RL/GEN/28
Page 4


        This proposal above seeks simply to clarify that not just any deterioration in the operating
performance of the domestic industry is sufficient to warrant a determination that the industry is
experiencing material injury. Rather, the industry must be experiencing injury that is important and
measurable in terms of its impact on the operating performance of the industry.

         In addition to the definition of “material injury” proposed above, an illustrative list of
benchmarks regarding the determinations that Article 3 requires could be useful in providing
authorities with specific guidelines and would make determinations more predictable for exporters.
Such a list could describe certain typical extreme situations in which authorities may not find that
dumped imports are, through the effects of dumping, causing injury to the domestic industry (“per se
rules”). The illustrative list would also describe those situations in which there is a presumption of no
injury, and authorities may not find injury in the absence of facts that are sufficient to overcome the
presumption (“rebuttable presumptions”)2.

Proposal 2: Determination of Material Injury

       We would propose to amend Article 3.1 to clarify that, when the authorities examine whether
the dumped imports cause material injury,3

    •   A determination of material injury shall be based upon determinations of: (1) whether the
        domestic industry in the importing country is experiencing material injury as defined by
        Proposal 1 above; and (2) if the domestic industry is experiencing material injury as defined
        by Proposal 1 above, whether that injury is caused by the dumped imports under
        investigation.
    •   A determination of whether the domestic industry is experiencing material injury shall be
        based on positive evidence and an objective examination of all the factors bearing on the state
        of the industry including those enumerated in Article 3.44.
    •   (As already incorporated in the current Article 3.1) a determination of whether the material
        injury to the domestic industry is caused by the dumped imports through the effects of
        dumping shall be based on positive evidence and an objective examination of (a) the volume
        of dumped imports and the effect of the dumped imports on prices in the domestic market for
        the like product, and (b) the consequent impact of these imports on domestic producers of
        such products.

Explanation:

        These changes are intended to make explicit what is implicit in the existing Article 3 of the
ADA, namely that, in the case of material injury, the authorities have to demonstrate both that the
domestic industry is experiencing material injury and that the dumped imports cause that injury.
While virtually all authorities consider both injury and causation in their investigations and
Articles 3.1, 3.2, 3.4, 3.5, and 3.6 deal with various aspects of the analysis of both injury and
causation, Article 3 does not contain an explicit statement anywhere of the overarching framework of
an injury determination. We believe clarifying this framework will avoid future disputes and ensure
more uniform approaches to the injury determination.
        2
            This idea has already been proposed by other Members (see “Proposals on Cost Saving in Anti-
Dumping Proceedings” (TN/RL/W/138, Submission from the European Communities and Japan)). The FANs
are willing to discuss further on this idea.
          3
            The determination of threat of material injury and material retardation of the establishment of a
domestic industry is not addressed in this proposal. The FANs are willing to discuss those issues in a separate
paper.
          4
            Consequently, we would also propose inserting in the first sentence of Article 3.4 after the word
“examination,” the following phrase: “the existence of injury and”.
                                                                                                  TN/RL/GEN/28
                                                                                                         Page 5


B.       CAUSATION

Proposal 3: Injury Caused by Dumped Imports

        We would propose adding the following phrase in the first sentence of Article 3.5
immediately after the phrase “dumped imports”: “in and of themselves and apart from any other
factors”.5

Explanation:

         The demonstration of causal relationship between dumped imports and injury to the domestic
industry requires further clarification. Article 3.5 requires the authorities to demonstrate “that the
dumped imports are, through the effects of dumping as set forth in paragraphs 2 and 4, causing injury
within the meaning of this Agreement”. Article 3.5 further sets out the so-called non-attribution
requirement whereby authorities must not attribute injury from other factors to injury from dumped
imports, obviously requiring that the injury from dumped imports must be analyzed separately from
injury from other factors.6 In order to fulfil this non-attribution requirement, it follows that the
authorities must analyze the causal relationship focusing on the injurious effects that the dumped
imports alone have on the domestic industry.

       In order to eliminate future disputes and ensure consistent application of Article 3, any
ambiguity in terms of the relationship of the dumped imports to the injury being experienced by the
domestic industry should be removed.

Proposal 4: Correlation Between Dumped Imports and Injury

        We would propose two changes to Article 3.5 in order to address the most basic analysis
which should be undertaken in determining whether dumped imports are causing injury to the
domestic industry. First, we would propose that a new sentence be added after the second sentence in
Article 3.5 as follows:

         “If the authorities can find neither a strong correlation7 between a significant increase
         in dumped imports and the injury to the domestic industry nor a strong correlation
         between a significant price undercutting by the dumped imports and the injury to the
         domestic industry, the authorities shall presume that there is no causal relationship
         between dumped imports and injury, unless the authorities clearly demonstrate, based


         5
            In order to make it clear that the “demonstration of a causal relationship” in the second sentence of
Article 3.5 refers to the demonstration amended by this proposal, we would also propose that the term “a causal
relationship” in the second sentence of Article 3.5 be amended to read “such causal relationship.”
          6
            In this context, we would point to the following statements the by the Appellate body in US – Hot
rolled Steel: “...the particular methods and approaches by which WTO Members choose to carry out the process
of separating and distinguishing the injurious effects of dumped imports from the injurious effects of the other
known causal factors are not prescribed by the Anti-Dumping Agreement.” and “We recognize, therefore, that it
may not be easy, as a practical matter, to separate and distinguish the injurious effects of different causal
factors. However, although this process may not be easy, this is precisely what is envisaged by the non-
attribution language. If the injurious effects of the dumped imports and the other known factors remain lumped
together and indistinguishable, there is simply no means of knowing whether injury ascribed to dumped imports
was, in reality, caused by other factors. Article 3.5, therefore, requires investigating authorities to undertake the
process of assessing appropriately, and separating and distinguishing, the injurious effects of dumped imports
from those of other known causal factors.”
          7
            This does not prescribe any specific methodology that the authorities have to use in order to show “a
strong correlation”.
TN/RL/GEN/28
Page 6


        on other evidence, that there nevertheless exists a causal relationship between
        dumped imports and injury.”

In addition, we would propose that a new sentence be added at the end of Article 3.5 as follows:

        “In the presence of a strong correlation between a factor or factors other than the
        dumped imports and the injury to the domestic industry, authorities shall presume that
        there is no causal relationship between the dumped imports and injury, unless
        authorities clearly demonstrate, based on other evidence, that the dumped imports, in
        and of themselves and apart from any other factors, are causing injury.”

Explanation:

         It is not the intention of this proposal to establish any particular methodology which must be
followed in determining whether there is a “strong correlation” or a sufficient causal relationship
between dumped imports and injury to the domestic industry. Indeed, authorities may use various
methods to arrive at their conclusions. However, the most basic analysis, an analysis virtually always
performed by authorities, is whether or not there is a correlation between volume or price of dumped
imports and the injury being experienced by the domestic industry. Furthermore, authorities usually
analyze whether there is a similar or stronger correlation between another factor or factors and the
injury being experienced by the domestic industry. It is simple to perform and, while not conclusive
on the issue of causation, offers a simple analytic tool on which to base a more detailed quantitative or
qualitative analysis.

         Given the importance of correlation analysis in the process and to ensure more consistent
application of this tool in investigations, the proposal seeks to provide some guidance as to how this
tool should be applied. The proposal does not prevent authorities from using other analytic
techniques nor does it require authorities to make determinations based wholly or partially on a
correlation analysis. If there is not a strong correlation8 between volume or price of the dumped
imports and injury to the domestic industry, the likelihood of a causal relationship between the two is
remote. Furthermore, if the correlation between other factors and the injury to the domestic imports is
as strong as or stronger than the correlation between dumped imports and the injury to the domestic
industry, there should be a rebuttable presumption that there is no causal relationship between dumped
imports and injury to the domestic industry.

Proposal 5: Non-attribution requirement: Injury caused by one or more domestic producers

        We would propose including in Article 3.5 a sentence as follows:

        “Authorities shall examine the possible impact that certain domestic producers of the
        like product have on the state of the domestic industry. In particular, authorities shall
        examine the impact of the sales volume and the prices of domestic producers of the
        like product to determine whether there is a significant price undercutting or
        depression caused by the price of one or more domestic producers of the like product,
        and shall not attribute injury caused by such price undercutting or depression to
        dumped imports.”




        8
           The analysis of simultaneity between volume or price trends of the dumped imports and trends of
indices having a bearing on the state of the domestic industry plays an important role in this analysis.
                                                                                            TN/RL/GEN/28
                                                                                                   Page 7


Explanation:

        An essential element of the causation analysis is whether or not imports have adversely
affected the prices in the domestic market of the importing country. However, the non-attribution
requirement of Article 3.5, while admittedly only illustrative, does not include in other factors the
pricing by one or more domestic producers. Hence, authorities have tended to analyze average import
prices against average domestic prices, so that the effects of competition among domestic competitors
are often overlooked. Given that pricing is a central issue in any injury investigation and that
competition between domestic producers, particularly in situations where these producers supply the
overwhelming majority of the domestic market, can affect prices as much or more than imports, it is
appropriate to ensure that the effect of the price set by price leader domestic producers on domestic
prices as a whole are analyzed and that the effects of such price setting within the scope of
competition between domestic producers are not attributed to dumped imports.9 This proposal is
intended to address this issue.

C.      REASONED EXPLANATION

Proposal 6: Adequate and Reasoned Explanation in Determination

        Add a new provision to the Agreement to state explicitly that authorities must provide an
adequate and reasoned explanation for all determinations made pursuant to Article 3, including an
explanation of how each of the relevant factors have been evaluated and how the authorities reached
its conclusion.
Explanation:

       The ADA should be clarified to state explicitly that authorities must arrive at a “reasoned
conclusion” in all Article 3 determinations. The “adequate and reasoned explanation,” requirement
would clarify the information an authority must provide in order to demonstrate that its conclusion
was “reasoned.”
                                                    __________




        9
           We note that similar problems would arise in a case where certain imports at non-dumped prices (for
example, certain imports from third countries) act as price leaders and the source of pricing pressures in the
domestic market, in which analyzing average import prices from all third countries on an aggregate would mask
and overlook the effect of such certain imports. We believe that such problems are already addressed by
Article 3.5 which includes “the volume and prices of imports not sold at dumped prices” in the list of “other
factors”. The FANs are open to discussing whether the Agreement should address such problems in the same
explicit manner as our proposal above.
