 WORLD TRADE
                                                                            IP/C/W/443
                                                                            18 March 2005
 ORGANIZATION
                                                                            (05-1147)

 Council for Trade-Related Aspects                                          Original: English
 of Intellectual Property Rights



            THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE TRIPS AGREEMENT AND THE
              CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY (CBD) AND THE
                    PROTECTION OF TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE

       TECHNICAL OBSERVATIONS ON ISSUES RAISED IN A COMMUNICATION
                     BY THE UNITED STATES (IP/C/W/434)

                                   Submission from Brazil and India


        The following submission, dated 4 March 2005, is being circulated at the request of the
Delegations of Brazil and India. It was circulated as an advance copy for the Council's March 2005
meeting.

                                          _______________


I.      INTRODUCTION

1.       By a communication dated 26 November 2004, the delegation of the United States submitted
a proposal1 on the relationship between the TRIPS Agreement and the Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD) mainly in response to the communications dated 2 March 2004 (IP/C/W/420 and
Add. 1 submitted by the delegations of Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, India, Peru, Thailand and
Venezuela) and 27 September 2004 (IP/C/W/429/Rev. 1 and Add. 1, 2 and 3 submitted by the same
delegations plus the delegations of Colombia, Dominican Republic and Pakistan).                    The
communication of 2 March proposed a Checklist of Issues on the relationship between the TRIPS
Agreement and the CBD to facilitate more focused, structured and result-oriented discussions on this
issue. The 27 September communication elaborated on the first of the three sets of issues identified in
the Checklist i.e., the disclosure of source and country of origin of biological resources and/or
traditional knowledge used in inventions. A further communication elaborating on the second set of
issues in the Checklist i.e. elements of the obligation to provide evidence of prior informed consent
under the relevant national regime was submitted to the December 2004 Council for TRIPS meeting.2

2.      In its submission, the delegation of the United States indicated that it hoped that its paper
would permit progress on this issue by identifying common ground where it exists and helping reduce
differences among Members in order to resolve concerns expressed by various delegations. We
welcome the submission of the United States and, in particular, the desire expressed by the
United States to resolve the differences on this issue, as soon as possible, based on the Checklist of
Issues as contained in document IP/C/W/420. We look forward to the continued engagement by the


        1
          See WTO document IP/C/W/434.
        2
          See WTO document IP/C/W/438 submitted by Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, India, Pakistan, Peru,
Thailand and Venezuela dated 10 December 2004.
IP/C/W/443
Page 2


delegation of the United States and all other delegations in the TRIPS Council and hope that, working
together, we can speedily come to a concrete solution and fulfil the Doha mandate in this regard.

3.       In its communication, the delegation of the United States expressed a number of concerns
regarding the proposed new patent disclosure requirements and offered an alternative approach.
While the communication raises some important issues, we consider that it has not made a case
against the proposed disclosure requirement. If anything, the communication has provided evidence
of why the proposed disclosure requirements would be the best way of achieving the objectives of
ensuring that the implementation of the TRIPS Agreement does not undermine or otherwise run
counter to the objectives of the CBD. This technical note is aimed at addressing the issues raised by
the delegation of the United States and elaborating on why a patent disclosure requirement is the only
effective means of addressing matters relating to patents and misappropriation of biological resources
and/or associated traditional knowledge. Some of these concerns were already addressed in the
submission contained in document IP/C/W/438, as well as in the new submission by a group of
developing countries on disclosure of evidence of benefit-sharing. Where necessary, however, we
will reiterate the explanations and justification for the various elements of the proposed regime.

II.     GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

4.       The delegation of the United States indicates in its submission that it "views with utmost
caution any proposals that would add uncertainties to patents rights that may undermine the role of the
delicately balanced patent system".3 There is no doubt that any system that introduces uncertainties
and imbalances in the patent system may be detrimental to technological progress in general and
protection of inventions in particular. However, the proposed disclosure requirement would in fact
introduce much needed certainty and preserve the balance in the patent system in consonance with the
objectives and principles of the TRIPS Agreements enshrined in Articles 7 and 8 and the conditions
on patent applicants that have been established by other relevant Articles of TRIPS. In this regard, it
is important to remember that facilitated access to biological resources and/or traditional knowledge,
as acknowledged by the United States in its submission,4 is of significant importance to researchers
and bio-prospectors that use the patent system. By establishing clear internationally agreed rules on
disclosure, prior informed consent and benefit-sharing, the proposed requirement would go a long
way in establishing certainty in these matters and not uncertainty.

5.      Furthermore, since disclosure of source and country of origin, prior informed consent by
providers of genetic resources and arrangements for fair and equitable benefit-sharing are issues of
high importance for biodiversity rich countries as well as local and indigenous communities, the
proposed system will not only ensure the legitimacy of the patent system but will in fact preserve and
strengthen the balance in the system. The balance will be preserved by recognizing the contributions
of Members as well as of traditional and local communities to innovation directly, or through the
conservation of biological resources and/or traditional knowledge. Establishing an equitable and
balanced system for the acquisition, maintenance and enforcement of patent rights, which rely upon or
are otherwise based on biological resources and/or traditional knowledge, would also help fulfil the
objectives of the TRIPS Agreement as expressed in Article 7.

6.       The United States also suggests that the "implementation of effective national laws that
directly address the relevant goals is the most effective way to proceed".5 As with the grant and
enjoyment of patent rights, the implementation of national access and benefit-sharing laws and
policies is indeed very important if an effective system of protection is to be established. However,
acknowledgement of the importance of establishing such national systems, a task which several

        3
          See para 2 of the submission, supra note 1.
        4
          See para 8 of the submission, supra note 1.
        5
          See para 4 of the submission, supra note 1.
                                                                                                IP/C/W/443
                                                                                                     Page 3


countries have already undertaken or are currently undertaking, does not in anyway provide a basis
for rejecting the establishment of an international system to support and facilitate the implementation
of the national systems. Such an approach would be akin to arguing that in order to ensure the
effective operation of the patent system, for example, only national patent laws are needed and not
international agreements such as the TRIPS Agreement.

7.      Clearly, both national and international mechanisms are critical in ensuring the mutual
supportiveness of the implementation of the CBD and the TRIPS Agreement. Bio-piracy and the
related issues being addressed in these discussions are issues with a significant international
dimension needing international solutions and enforcement. As pointed out in document IP/C/W/438:

        "The CBD also provides that States have the responsibility to ensure that activities
        within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the environment of other
        States or of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.6 In essence, these
        provisions are aimed at regulating, in particular, access by persons from outside the
        State that holds the genetic resources, a task that requires cooperation and
        enforcement in third countries. Indeed, Article 5 of the CBD recognizes cooperation
        of this nature, including through competent international organizations, for
        conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity."7

         WTO is a competent organization on matters relating to bio-piracy and the issuance of patents
with respect to inventions that have relied upon and/or used biological resources and/or associated
traditional knowledge.

III.    SPECIFIC OBSERVATIONS

A.      PRIOR INFORMED CONSENT AND MISAPPROPRIATION

8.      On this issue, document IP/C/W/434 argues that "new8 patent disclosure requirements will not
work to guarantee that prior informed consent was obtained" and that "a completely separate,
transparent mechanism needs to be established outside the patent system".9 An international
disclosure requirement alone will not work to guarantee prior informed consent just like a national
regime alone will not work. The proposed mandatory, global disclosure requirement is not envisaged
as a stand-alone system, but as a vital measure and incentive that would support and ensure the
effective operation of national regimes for prior informed consent. Consequently, while contractual
arrangements may have a role to play in implementing the requirements of prior informed consent,
and could constitute the evidence of prior informed consent under the proposed system, clearly such
arrangements alone cannot suffice to ensure the monitoring and enforcement of these requirements in
third countries. Contractual arrangements or similar mechanisms in national laws can only suffice if
they are obligatory and enforceable across borders.

9.      The United States also argues that "a transparent prior informed consent regime is needed to
ensure that… researchers and/or collectors can conduct their research activities in an appropriate
manner" and that "those with intent of acting in bad faith will not be deterred by disclosure


        6
           See Article 3 of the CBD.
        7
           See para 3 of the submission, supra note 2.
         8
           It is presumed that by characterizing the proposed disclosure system as "new", the United States
considers that existing provisions of the TRIPS Agreement permit Members to require of patent applicants the
disclosure of the source and country of origin of biological resource and/or associated traditional knowledge
used in an invention. However, what is needed for the effective prevention of bio-piracy and misappropriation
are mandatory provisions, not permissive ones.
         9
           See para 7 of the submission by the United States, supra note 1.
IP/C/W/443
Page 4


requirements".10 It is further argued that "the act of patenting per se, does not amount to
misappropriation". As already noted, the proposed disclosure requirements constitute a core
component of international efforts to ensure a transparent regime that, while allowing for access by
researchers and/or collectors to biological resources, ensures compliance with national regimes
relating to prior informed consent and benefit-sharing. Such transparency and predictability cannot be
established through a fragmented nation-to-nation system but only through an internationally
established and enforced system. How can myriad separate and different national systems with no
common denominator regulate the relationships between entities, persons and activities taking place
in different countries?

10.      Regarding the deterrence aspect of the disclosure proposal in respect of those actors intent on
acting in bad faith, while it is true that the disclosure requirement by itself will not deter them, the
legal consequences of the failure to comply with the disclosure requirements of the proposed
international regime can, if properly calibrated, deter those bent on acting in bad faith. In this regard,
documents IP/C/W/429/Rev.1 and IP/C/W/438 elaborate on several possible legal consequences for
non-compliance, the nature of which will depend on whether one is dealing with a formal or
substantive component of the disclosure and on whether it is at the level of pre- or post-grant. The
legal effects proposed in the above-mentioned documents include non-processing of the patent
application, revocation of the patent, full or partial transfer of the rights to the invention, narrowing of
the scope of the claims, and imposition of criminal, civil and/or administrative penalties.

11.     However, we recognize that these sanctions may be insufficient to have the full deterrence
value that is desired. In this regard, we welcome additional proposals by any delegation aimed at
strengthening the sanctions for failure to comply with the proposed disclosure requirement in order to
ensure that such sanctions provide sufficient deterrence.

12.      Finally, with respect to whether patenting per se could constitute misappropriation, it is
important to note that no suggestion has been made that the act of patenting per se would constitute
misappropriation under the proposed disclosure regime. It is the act of applying for a patent or
patenting an invention where, biological resources and/or traditional knowledge is used, among
others: to form part of the claimed invention; during the process of developing the claimed invention;
as a necessary prerequisite for the development of the invention; to facilitate the development of the
invention; and/or as necessary background material for the development of the invention, without
obtaining the prior informed consent of the Member or relevant authorities of the Member in which
the biological resources and/or traditional knowledge are obtained and without providing for equitable
benefit-sharing, that constitutes a serious form of misappropriation. Moreover, it is clear that the
system of patenting per se being followed in many cases today results in bad or questionable patents.
The reason for that happening is insufficient disclosure of the details of the existing knowledge and
the inadequacy of the existing patent system to check the relevant details. The proposed disclosure
condition would surely contribute to preventing the issue of bad and questionable patents.

B.      BENEFIT-SHARING

13.     Document IP/C/W/434 argues that the proposed disclosure requirement per se cannot transfer
benefits, as such a requirement would merely convey the information required but would have no
mechanism to transfer benefits between parties. As already noted, the proposed obligation to disclose
evidence of prior informed consent and benefit-sharing under the TRIPS Agreement is not intended as
a stand-alone system but as a system that would supplement and ensure the effective enforcement of
national regimes. Consequently, it is not the international obligations per se that will transfer benefits
but the proposed system coupled with the relevant national regimes. Moreover, given the enormous
number of patents granted worldwide, the disclosure requirement will facilitate the monitoring of

        10
             Para 8 of the submission, supra note 1.
                                                                                             IP/C/W/443
                                                                                                  Page 5


these patents by the owners of the biological material and/or associated traditional knowledge with a
view to check whether prior informed consent and benefit-sharing arrangements are being adhered to
by the patent owners upon commercialization. The United States also lists some examples to argue
that benefits from an invention would be diminished if the patent was issued and later invalidated, or
was never issued, and the invention is nevertheless commercialized.11 However, the situation exists
for all kinds of patents, and is not limited to patents involving disclosure of the country and source of
origin of biological materials and/or associated traditional knowledge. In such cases, as in the case
with any other type of patents, other legal means would have to be resorted to by the owners of the
biological material and/or associated traditional knowledge to rectify the damage, for example by
commercializing the product themselves (in case of invalidation) or competing in the market place
with those who commercialize it (in cases of commercialization without patent rights). What changes
with the grant of a patent is the grant of a legally enforceable monopoly to the exclusion of everyone
else without any feasible recourse, particularly for developing countries and impoverished traditional
and local communities, for a long period of time, and it is this damage that will be prevented by the
proposed disclosure requirement.

14.      The disclosure of evidence of benefit-sharing arising out of the utilization of genetic resources
and/or traditional knowledge in inventions, as contemplated, is aimed at not only ensuring that there is
benefit-sharing per se but that sharing of benefits is fair and equitable among the parties, taking into
account the circumstances of each particular case. The provision of evidence of benefit-sharing will
therefore include evidence that there was sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of the
genetic resources and/or traditional knowledge in the invention and that the shares of benefits that
accrued to the source and country of origin or local/indigenous community was equitable and fair in
the circumstances. While it has been argued that there may be no straightforward way of determining
the equitable and fair sharing of benefits, in the very least there are a number of factors that could be
used to make this determinations. These include, among others:

        •        assuming that there was sufficient prior informed consent, that the sharing of benefits
                 or an arrangement for future sharing of benefits is premised upon mutually agreed
                 terms in the context of Article 15(7) of the CBD. Mutually agreed terms generally
                 cover elements relating to the conditions, obligations, procedures, types, timing,
                 distribution and mechanisms of the benefits shared; and

        •        that there is a reporting obligation on issues relating to patenting or commercialization
                 especially where future benefit-sharing is contemplated.

15.     Where there is no national regime, it is foreseen that the applicant will be deemed to have
complied with the obligation by indicating in the relevant declaration that there was no national
regime in the country of origin, but that there was benefit-sharing or an arrangement for future
benefit-sharing, at least, with the authority or community in charge of the location where the
biological resources and/or traditional knowledge were accessed.

16.      The United States in its submission also raises the question of what would happen where there
is no patent but there is in any case commercialization, that is, commercialization that occurs outside
the patent system or commercialization by others where the patent is, for example, revoked. These
are all important questions and valid concerns. However, these are concerns and issues that will be
dealt with outside the patent system and is not a subject that the TRIPS Council can satisfactorily
address. The proposed disclosure requirements are aimed at addressing situations where biological
resources and/or traditional knowledge is utilized for purposes of obtaining or otherwise exploiting
patents. In other words, the system is aimed at addressing patent related issues and therefore only
constitutes one element, albeit a crucial one, of a larger national and international benefit-sharing
        11
             See para. 10 of the US Submission, IP/C/W/434.
IP/C/W/443
Page 6


regime. Situations falling outside the patent system would have to be addressed within the national
regimes in conjunction with other international rules outside the patent system including, where
applicable, by addressing issues relating to trade secret laws or competition laws.

C.      PREVENTING ERRONEOUSLY GRANTED PATENTS

17.      Document IP/C/W/434 also submits that the proposed disclosure requirements will be
ineffective in preventing erroneously granted patents and that such a requirement would do little to
ensure ascertainment of appropriate inventorship, novelty or inventive step. Indeed, the mere
disclosure of source and country of origin may not help ascertain inventorship etc. However, to the
extent that the disclosed information will help determine whether the biological resources and/or
traditional knowledge was used: to form part of the claimed invention; during the process of
developing the claimed invention; as a necessary prerequisite for the development of the invention;
to facilitate the development of the invention; and/or as necessary background material and/or
information for the development of the invention, such information would be relevant in determining
the existence of prior art and the non-obviousness of the claimed invention, determining inventorship
or entitlement to the patent, the scope of the claim and/or for understanding or carrying out the
invention. Indeed, the United States accepts this premise and argues in its submission, in
paragraph 29, that "patent examiners worldwide could use organized searchable databases of genetic
resources and traditional knowledge when examining patent applications. This could aid in the
discovery of relevant prior art and thereby improve the examination of patent applications in the
relevant field".12 The disclosure of the country and source of origin will enable the patent examiner to
do this job more effectively and prevent issue of bad patents.

D.      ADDITIONAL CONCERNS RAISED IN THE SUBMISSION BY THE UNITED STATES: UNCERTAINTY,
        ADMINISTRATIVE BURDEN AND EFFECTIVENESS

18.      The submission by the United States raises a number of additional concerns in its
communication including that the proposed disclosure requirement would "create a 'cloud' of
uncertainty over the patent right", that the requirement would lead to significant administrative
burdens and costs, that patent examiners would be unable to determine the validity of prior informed
consent or adequate benefit-sharing and that the system would not be an effective monitoring system.
First, with respect to uncertainty, as already explained:

        "[T]he proposed disclosure requirement would in fact introduce much needed
        certainty and preserve the balance in the patent system in consonance with the
        objectives and principles of the TRIPS Agreements enshrined in Articles 7 and 8 and
        the conditions on patent applicants that have been established by other relevant
        Articles of TRIPS. In this regard, it is important to remember that facilitated access
        to biological resources and/or traditional knowledge, as acknowledged by the
        United States in its submission, is of significant importance to researchers and bio-
        prospectors that use the patent system. By establishing clear internationally agreed
        rules on disclosure, prior informed consent and benefit-sharing, the proposed
        requirement would go a long way in establishing certainty in these matters, not
        uncertainty."13

19.    The question of administrative burden and costs has already been addressed in an earlier
communication.14 However, it is worth repeating here that while we consider that there will be
administrative implications and there may be cost implications for applicants as they are expected to

        12
           See the United States Submission, supra note 1.
        13
           See para. 4 above.
        14
           See the communication of 27 September 2004, supra note 10, paras. 9 and 10.
                                                                                            IP/C/W/443
                                                                                                 Page 7


at least employ all reasonable measures to determine the country of origin and source of the material
to meet this obligation, it is not foreseen that administrative procedures and costs related to meeting
the obligation would be in any way burdensome. In any case, such a burden would generally be
subsumed in, or at least not be more burdensome than, the usual burden befalling the patent applicant
to make out a case for his claims under current patent procedures and practices.

20.      As a matter of patent law practice, there are a number of other disclosure requirements,
including disclosure of best mode, and in other jurisdictions, such as the United States, a requirement
to disclose all information material to patentability. The proposed requirement is no different from
these obligations the fulfilment of which has not been shown to impose any unnecessary burden on
applicants. In fact, for the US patent system, the proposed disclosure requirement should not be
burdensome at all, as it could most likely be covered under the 'information material to patentability'
requirement. The US system would only have to put in place an additional requirement to cover prior
informed consent and benefit-sharing. The collection and recording of the information necessary to
meet the obligation should not require applicants to undertake significant additional recording and
documentation outside what would be done in the process of developing an invention even where
there is no disclosure obligation. The disclosure obligation as envisaged, taking into account existing
practice, would therefore not impose any burdensome administrative or other costs on applicants.

21.     With respect to determining the validity of prior informed consent and adequacy of benefit-
sharing, it is important to note, firstly, that no suggestion has been made that patent examiners would
be required to determine the validity of prior informed consent or the adequacy of benefit-sharing.
Secondly, as explained in the communications of 27 September and 10 December 2004,15 the
obligation of patent applicants would be clearly defined under the proposed mandatory disclosure
system and all the patent examiner would be required to determine is that the patent applicant has met
the defined disclosure obligation. As noted, in the communication of 10 December, in particular:

        "It is foreseen that the applicant will be deemed to comply with the requirement of
        furnishing evidence of prior informed consent if the patent application contains
        and/or is accompanied by a declaration, in the prescribed form, indicating that prior
        informed consent was obtained from the relevant national authorities (and local and
        indigenous communities, where applicable). Further, the declaration would be
        accompanied, where relevant, by the actual evidence of prior informed consent, for
        example, in the form of a certificate or duly certified contract between the applicant
        and the national authorities of the country of origin. In this regard, it should be noted
        that it may be possible that a single declaration with the necessary evidence could be
        furnished to cover the requirements on disclosure of source and country of origin,
        evidence of prior informed consent as well as evidence of equitable benefit-
        sharing."16

22.      Consequently, the role of the patent examiner will be limited to confirming that the patent
application contains a declaration in the prescribed form indicating that prior informed consent was
obtained and that benefits were shared and/or that there exists an arrangement for future
benefit-sharing in accordance with the relevant national law. The patent office will need to take
decisions based on these documents only when the validity of a patent is challenged in the pre- or
post-grant opposition or revocation proceedings. In such cases the patent office will have evidence
from both the parties to the proceedings and could take a decision like any other ground on which the
grant of a patent is opposed or revocation of a patent is requested.



        15
             Supra notes 10 and 2 respectively.
        16
             See para.11 of the submission.
IP/C/W/443
Page 8


23.     Finally, on the question of effectiveness of the system. As already pointed out, the proposed
regime is not intended as a stand-alone mechanism.17 However, the proposed international obligation
for disclosure coupled with national regimes and other international rules such as those developed
under the CBD or elsewhere would constitute an effective system.

IV.     OBSERVATIONS ON THE PROPOSED OPTIONS FOR ACHIEVING
        APPROPRIATE ACCESS AND EQUITABLE BENEFIT-SHARING AND
        PREVENTING BAD PATENTS

24.      In light of the concerns expressed in its submission, all of which we have addressed in this
communication, the United States in its submission also proposed an alternative mechanism outside
the patent system as the most effective way of addressing issues related to misappropriation and bio-
piracy. Before commenting on the proposed alternative approach, we wish to reiterate that a
fragmented nation-to-nation system cannot achieve our objectives. Such a system would entail very
high transaction costs and would hence be difficult to implement. Only through an internationally
established and enforced system can the problems of misappropriation and bio-piracy, which have a
significant international dimension, be effectively addressed.

A.      ACHIEVING PRIOR INFORMED CONSENT

25.      While delineated national points of contact and the establishment of permit or other national
systems are important elements of a national regime and may be a necessary prerequisite for ensuring
prior informed consent, such national requirements can do little to address the transnational character
of the problem of misappropriation and bio-piracy.

B.      ACHIEVING EQUITABLE BENEFIT-SHARING

26.     The limitations of a contractual system in addressing the international dimension of the issues
under discussion have been amply demonstrated in earlier communications and repeated here in
paragraphs 8 to 16 above.

C.      ORGANIZED DATABASES AND INFORMATION MATERIAL TO PATENTABILITY

27.     While organized searchable databases may play, in some cases, an important role in helping
ensure that prior art information is available to patent examiners, we do not see how such databases
can be a substitute for the disclosure requirement. Just like organized databases cannot achieve the
purposes such as the one served by the requirement under United States law for patent applicants to
disclose information material to patentability, or requirements such as for disclosing best mode, it
cannot serve the purpose of the disclosure requirement. More importantly, a voluntary system of
searchable databases or provision of information material to patentability will provide no guarantee
that in fact patent examiners in different countries will consider this information in the prior art
search.

28.      One should also recall, furthermore, that, as has been pointed out in previous submissions,18
databases in themselves have other important limitations as a possible tool to facilitate the protection
of traditional knowledge. Given the vast breadth and depth of such knowledge, no documentation
effort can be completely comprehensive and exhaustive of all the traditional knowledge available in a
country. This is particularly true when traditional knowledge used in a particular invention is
undocumented, based on oral traditions or documented in a local language. Moreover, in many

        17
           See paras. 6 and 7 above.
        18
           See WTO document IP/C/W/403, submitted by Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
India, Peru, Thailand and Venezuela.
                                                                                            IP/C/W/443
                                                                                                 Page 9


developing countries there are serious concerns about the appropriateness of use of databases for
reasons of loss of confidentiality of the traditional knowledge which is not in the public domain.
Given these limitations, it is clear that, while databases can, in some cases, complement the purpose
of expanded disclosure norms, they cannot substitute them.

D.      POST-GRANT OPPOSITION AND RE-EXAMINATION

29.      While pre-grant and post-grant opposition or re-examination proceedings can rectify the
situations of erroneously granted patents, such proceedings cannot replace the need for a disclosure
requirement. If anything, the effectiveness of such proceedings with respect to cases involving
biological resources and/or traditional knowledge will be significantly improved or may depend on
the disclosure obligation. In this regard, the disclosure requirement as envisaged will also be useful in
cases relating to challenges to patent grants or disputes on inventorship or entitlement to a claimed
invention as well as infringement cases.

                                              __________
