 WORLD TRADE                                                                G/C/W/678
                                                                            27 November 2012
 ORGANIZATION
                                                                            (12-6543)

 Council for Trade in Goods                                                 Original: English



                UKRAINE'S ARTICLE XXVIII NOTIFICATION:
   JOINT STATEMENT BY AUSTRALIA, BRAZIL, CANADA, CHILE, COLOMBIA,
 CROATIA, THE EUROPEAN UNION, GUATEMALA, HONG KONG CHINA, ICELAND,
JAPAN, KOREA, LIECHTENSTEIN, MALAYSIA, MEXICO, NEW ZEALAND, NORWAY,
          OMAN, PARAGUAY, SINGAPORE, SWITZERLAND, TURKEY
                       AND THE UNITED STATES


        The following joint statement delivered at the Council for Trade in Goods meeting on
26 November, 2012 by Australia, on behalf of the delegations of Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Croatia, the European Union, Guatemala, Hong Kong China, Iceland, Japan, Korea,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Paraguay, Singapore, Switzerland,
Turkey and the United States, is being circulated at the request of those delegations.


                                           _______________


         Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, the European Union, Guatemala, Hong
Kong China, Iceland, Japan, Korea, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Oman,
Paraguay, Singapore, Switzerland, Turkey and the United States would like to express strong
concerns about Ukraine's Article XXVIII notification contained in G/SECRET/34 circulated on
12 September, 2012. Ukraine's expansive notification raises both commercial and systemic concerns.
Furthermore it calls into question Ukraine's commitment to the spirit and letter of fundamental WTO
disciplines.

         A number of concerns have already been referred to in recent meetings of the General
Council, the Committee on Market Access and the Committee on Agriculture. The number of
Members supporting this statement and expressing concerns in previous meetings demonstrates the
seriousness of this issue both to individual Members and to the WTO as a whole. We have made our
views quite clear: it would be in the interests of all WTO Members for Ukraine to withdraw its
notification.

         We have serious concerns regarding the intent of Ukraine's proposed action and that Ukraine's
notification covers such a large number of key tariff lines and sectors, both agricultural and industrial.
We believe the extent of Ukraine's notification, 371 tariff lines, goes beyond the intended scope of
Article XXVIII. Binding of tariff levels is one of the basic principles of WTO, and serves to
guarantee the security and predictability of the multilateral trading system. Ukraine's notification,
coming so soon after its WTO accession, challenges that basic principle.

        The notification from Ukraine also comes at a time when global leaders have called on all
countries to resist increasing trade protectionism. Ukraine has previously claimed its notification is
not protectionist in nature, but the high number of tariff lines involved places such assertions in
serious doubt.

                                                                                                       . /.
G/C/W/678
Page 2


        Moreover, it will be difficult for Ukraine to 'maintain a general level of reciprocal and
mutually advantageous concessions no less favorable to trade' with such a high number of tariff lines
involved and the number of Members affected. It is unclear the extent to which Ukraine will be able
to compensate Members for the concessions it seeks to modify.

        We are also concerned about the lack of transparency by Ukraine in respect of its proposed
modifications and the process it intends to pursue. A Member seeking to modify its tariff schedule
should indicate the nature of the proposed modifications either in the notification or as soon as
possible thereafter. Ukraine has not circulated information about its proposed new rates or how it will
compensate Members. Ukraine should have provided this information before now. Ukraine's failure
to do so has limited Members' ability to understand Ukraine's objectives and to assess the likely
impact on them.

       In the interests of the multilateral trading system and the global economy, we once again urge
Ukraine to withdraw its notification.



                                             __________
