 WORLD TRADE                                                                G/LIC/Q/BRA/11
                                                                            8 May 2009
 ORGANIZATION
                                                                            (09-2260)

 Committee on Import Licensing                                              Original: English



              BRAZIL'S NON-AUTOMATIC IMPORT LICENSING PROCEDURES

                           Replies from BRAZIL to questions from CHINA1


        The following communication, dated 30 April 2009, is being circulated at the request of the
delegation of Brazil.

                                          _______________


        China is concerned that the procedures and criteria used by Brazil in connection with the
consideration and issuance of non-automatic import licenses are inconsistent with Brazil’s
obligations under the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures (“the Agreement”) and the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 1994. To address these concerns, and pursuant to Article
3.5(a) of the Agreement, China is transmitting to Brazil questions regarding its non-automatic import
licensing procedures.

1.      Please identify (by tariff classification) the goods that require non-automatic import licenses.

ANSWER:          As informed in Brazil’s most recent notifications to the Import Licensing Committee,
the list of goods that require non-automatic import licenses (including its identification by tariff
classification) can be consulted on the website of MDIC - Ministry of Development, Industry and
Trade (www.mdic.gov.br), and also in SISCOMEX, Brazil’s electronic system of trade.

2.      Please explain the criteria used to determine which goods require non-automatic import
licenses.

ANSWER:          Decisions regarding the requirement of non-automatic import licensing procedures
follow criteria compatible with the provisions of WTO Agreements.

3.       In Brazil’s most recent notifications to the Committee on Import Licensing,
(e.g., G/LIC/N/3/BRA/6), it stated that non-automatic import licenses are required with respect to: -
products which may cause damage to human, animal, or plant health; - products capable of causing
environmental damage; - products classified as weapons or made for warlike purposes; - products
subject to non-tariff quotas as established in the agreements of the Uruguay Round; and - products
subject to tariff quotas. Please indicate which of these categories covers toys.

ANSWER:          As indicated in Brazil’s most recent notifications to the Import Licensing Committee,
the categories listed above are non-exhaustive examples of products that are subject to non-automatic
import licensing. Toys are subject to non-automatic import licensing procedures because there are
technical regulations that they must comply with. Those technical regulations were notified to the
Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade.

        1
            See document G/LIC/Q/BRA/5.
G/LIC/Q/BRA/11
Page 2



4.      Please indicate the information that must be provided in an application for a non-automatic
import license. If additional or different information must be provided with respect to applications
relating to toys, please indicate that information as well.

ANSWER:          Information requirements related to applications for non-automatic import licenses
are contained in Directive SECEX No. 25/2008, which can be consulted on the website of MDIC.
Besides general rules applied to non-automatic import licensing procedures, toys are subject to
specific provisions contained in paragraph 4 of Article 11 of the above-mentioned Directive and in
item VI of its Annex B. Directive SECEX No. 25/2008 will be soon notified to the Committee, but it
is important to note that it does not modify the procedures for toys established by Directive SECEX
No. 36/2007 which was notified to the Import Licensing Committee under G/LIC/N/1/BRA/4,
G/LIC/N/2/BRA/4 and G/LIC/N/3/BRA/7.

5.      Please explain the procedures followed by Brazil in considering applications for non-
automatic import licenses. If additional or different procedures are followed with respect to
applications relating to toys, please explain those procedures as well.

ANSWER:          The procedures followed by Brazil with regard to applications for non-automatic
import licenses consist in examining if information and documentation requirements established by
legislation have been fulfilled by applicants.

6.      We understand that Brazil has a two-track system for analyzing non-automatic import license
applications: the “green track” and the “red track”. If so,

(a)     Please explain the criteria considered in assigning an application to these tracks.
(b)     Please explain differences in the procedures followed with respect to applications that have
        been assigned to each track.
(c)     If additional or different criteria or procedures are used for applications relating to toys,
        please explain those criteria and/or procedures.
(d)     Please explain when, if ever, the two-track system was notified to the Committee on Import
        Licensing.

ANSWER:         Brazil does not have a two-track system for analyzing non-automatic import license
applications.

7.      Please explain whether Brazil uses official or unofficial reference prices in connection with
applications for non-automatic import licenses. If so,

(a)     Please explain the basis under the Agreement for using reference prices as a criterion for
        reviewing applications for non-automatic import licenses.
(b)     Please explain the procedures for establishing reference prices. In particular, please explain
        the role that private parties play in the process, and whether there is an opportunity for
        public comment.
(c)     Please explain how reference prices are calculated, and provide sample calculations for the
        reference prices currently in effect for toys.
(d)      Please explain how reference prices are used in processing applications for non-automatic
        import licenses.
(e)     Please explain whether applications are assigned to the “green track” or “red track” based
        on reference prices.
(f)     Please explain how applications with prices that are below the relevant reference price are
        treated.
                                                                                     G/LIC/Q/BRA/11
                                                                                              Page 3


(g)     Please explain when, if ever, the reference price system was notified to the Committee on
        Import Licensing.

ANSWER:          Brazil does not use official or unofficial reference prices in connection with
applications for non-automatic import licenses.

8.      Please provide data for the period May 2006 through September 2008 on the quantity and
value of imports of toys for which applications for non-automatic import licenses were received, the
quantity of such licenses that were issued, and the average time between the date of receipt of the
import license application and the issuance of a license. Please provide this data separately for each
supplying country. With respect to the time required for issuance of licenses, please provide separate
periods for toys placed on the “red track” versus those placed on the “green track”.

ANSWER:         According to data available so far, the number of non-automatic import licenses for
toys that were granted and used between May 2006 and February 2008 was 21.980, of which 16.931
corresponded to Chinese products. The total value of imports related to those licenses was US$
396,916,700.00. On average, it takes 15 days to process applications for import licenses to toys. Brazil
does not have a “green/red track” system for analysis of applications for non-automatic import
licenses.

9.      Please explain how the “green track” and “red Track” system, based on an unpublished
reference price, is consistent with Brazil’s obligations under Article 1.3 of the Agreement that import
licensing procedures must be “neutral in application” and “administered in a fair and equitable
manner”.

ANSWER:         Brazil does not have a “green/red track” system, based on reference prices, related to
import licensing procedures.


                                             __________
