United Nations A/59/459
GeneralAssembly Distr.: General
22 November 2004
English
Original: Arabic
04-61937 (E) 011204
*0461937*
Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 65
General and complete disarmament
Report of the First Committee
Rapporteur: Mr. Mohamed Ali Saleh Alnajar (Yemen)
I. Introduction
1. The item entitled:
“General and complete disarmament:
“(a) Notification of nuclear tests;
“(b) Further measures in the field of disarmament for the prevention of an
arms race on the seabed and the ocean floor and in the subsoil thereof;
“(c) Disarmament and non-proliferation education;
“(d) Measures to uphold the authority of the 1925 Geneva Protocol;
“(e) Relationship between disarmament and development;
“(f) Mongolia’s international security and nuclear-weapon-free status;
“(g) Missiles;
“(h) Compliance with arms limitation and disarmament and non-proliferation
agreements;
“(i) Regional disarmament;
“(j) Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels;
“(k) Improving the effectiveness of the methods of work of the First
Committee;
“(l) National legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use
goods and technology;
“(m) Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context;2
A/59/459
“(n) Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-
proliferation;
“(o) Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation
of agreements on disarmament and arms control;
“(p) Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on
the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons;
“(q) Reducing nuclear danger;
“(r) Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction;
“(s) Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas;
“(t) Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: a new agenda;
“(u) Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction;
“(v) Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on
Their Destruction;
“(w) Transparency in armaments;
“(x) Nuclear disarmament;
“(y) Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and
collecting them;
“(z) The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects;
“(aa) United Nations conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear
dangers in the context of nuclear disarmament;
“(bb)Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia;
“(cc) Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament measures;
“(dd)Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted
to disarmament”
was included in the provisional agenda of the fifty-ninth session of the General
Assembly in accordance with Assembly resolutions 42/38 C of 30 November 1987,
56/24 A to I, K, M, P, Q to S, U and V of 29 November 2001, 57/59 to 57/67 and
57/69 to 57/86 of 22 November 2002, 58/37 to 58/39, 58/41 to 58/56, 58/58 and
58/59 of 8 December 2003 and 58/241 of 23 December 2003 and decisions 56/411
to 56/413 of 29 November 2001, 57/515 of 22 November 2002 and 58/517 to 58/521
of 8 December 2003.
2. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2004, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its
agenda and to allocate it to the First Committee.
3. At its 1st meeting, on 30 September 2004, the First Committee decided to hold
a general debate on all disarmament and international security items allocated to it,
namely items 57 to 72, which was held at the 2nd to 9th meetings, on 4, 5, 7, 8 and3
A/59/459
11 to 14 October (see A/C.1/59/PV.2-9). Thematic discussions on the items were
held, and draft resolutions were introduced and considered, at the 10th to 16th
meetings, from 18 to 22 and on 25 October (see A/C.1/59/PV.10-16). Action on all
draft resolutions was taken at the 17th to 23rd meetings, from 26 to 28 October and
on 1 and 3 to 5 November (see A/C.1/59/PV.17-23).
4. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following
documents:
(a) Report of the Conference on Disarmament;1
(b) Report of the Disarmament Commission;2
(c) Report of the Secretary-General on further measures in the field of
disarmament for the prevention of an arms race on the seabed and the ocean floor
and in the subsoil thereof (A/59/117 and Add.1);
(d) Report of the Secretary-General on conventional arms control at the
regional and subregional levels (A/59/118);
(e) Report of the Secretary-General on confidence-building measures in the
regional and subregional context (A/59/127 and Corr.1 and Add.1);
(f) Report of the Secretary-General on the promotion of multilateralism in
the area of disarmament and non-proliferation (A/59/128 and Add.1);
(g) Report of the Secretary-General on the observance of environmental
norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms
control (A/59/129 and Add.1);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General on improving the effectiveness of the
methods of work of the First Committee (A/59/132 and Add.1, Add.2 and Corr.1
and Add.3-6);
(i) Consolidated report of the Secretary-General on: follow-up to the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat
or Use of Nuclear Weapons; reducing nuclear danger; towards a nuclear-weapon-
free world: the need for a new agenda; and nuclear disarmament (A/59/136);
(j) Report of the Secretary-General on missiles (A/59/137 and Add.1);
(k) Report of the Secretary-General on measures to prevent terrorists from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction (A/59/156 and Add.1);
(l) Report of the Secretary-General on disarmament and non-proliferation
education (A/59/178 and Add.1 and 2);
(m) Consolidated report of the Secretary-General on: assistance to States for
curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and collecting them; and the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects (A/59/181);
(n) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms (A/59/193);
(o) Report of the Secretary-General on the issue of missiles in all its aspects
(A/59/278 and Corr.1);
__________________
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/59/27).
2 Ibid., Supplement No. 42 (A/59/42).4
A/59/459
(p) Report of the Secretary-General on Mongolia’s international security and
nuclear-weapon-free status (A/59/364);
(q) Note by the Secretary-General on the relationship between disarmament
and development in the current international context (A/59/119);
(r) Note by the Secretary-General on measures to uphold the authority of the
1925 Geneva Protocol (A/59/179).
II. Consideration of proposals
A. Draft resolutions
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.5
5. At the 15th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of the Netherlands
introduced a draft resolution entitled “National legislation on transfer of arms,
military equipment and dual-use goods and technology” (A/C.1/59/L.5).
6. At its 18th meeting, on 27 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.5 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution I).
Draft resolution A/C.1/58/L.6 and Rev.1
7. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, on behalf of Egypt, Indonesia and the Islamic Republic of Iran, introduced a
draft resolution entitled “Missiles” (A/C.1/59/L.6).
8. At the 16th meeting, on 25 October, the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, on behalf of the sponsors of draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.6, introduced a
revised draft resolution (A/C.1/59/L.6/Rev.1), which contained the following
change: in operative paragraph 2, after the words “as appropriate,” the words
“taking into account the views expressed by member States,” were inserted.
9. At the 17th meeting, on 26 October, the Secretary of the Committee made a
statement on behalf of the Secretary-General concerning the conference-servicing
implications of the draft resolution (see A/C.1/59/SR.17).
10. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.6/Rev.1 by a recorded vote of 98 to 2, with 60 abstentions (see para. 90,
draft resolution II). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New5
A/59/459
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.10
11. At the 15th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Malaysia, on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Observance of
environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on
disarmament and arms control” (A/C.1/59/L.10). Subsequently, Burkina Faso and
Liberia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
12. At its 18th meeting, on 27 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.10 by a recorded vote of 165 to 1, with 3 abstentions (see para. 90, draft
resolution III). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,6
A/59/459
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
France, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.11
13. At the 15th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Malaysia, on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Promotion of
multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation” (A/C.1/59/L.11).
14. At its 18th meeting, on 27 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.11 by a recorded vote of 109 to 9, with 49 abstentions (see para. 90,
draft resolution IV). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
Albania, Israel, Latvia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Poland, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.7
A/59/459
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia and
Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, Uzbekistan.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.12
15. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Malaysia, on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Measures to uphold
the authority of the 1925 Geneva Protocol” (A/C.1/59/L.12).
16. At its 18th meeting, on 27 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.12 by a recorded vote of 165 to none, with 3 abstentions (see para. 90,
draft resolution V). The voting was as follows:3
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
__________________
3 The delegation of Mauritania subsequently indicated that, had it been present, it would have
voted in favour.8
A/59/459
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Israel, Marshall Islands, United States of America.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.14
17. At the 15th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Malaysia, on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Convening of the
fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament”
(A/C.1/59/L.14), which he orally revised by adding, in operative paragraph 2, the
words “in 2006” after the words “substantive sessions”.
18. At the 19th meeting, on 28 October, the Secretary of the Committee made a
statement on behalf of the Secretary-General concerning the conference-servicing
implications of the draft resolution (see A/C.1/59/SR.19).
19. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.14,
as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution VI).
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.16
20. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Poland introduced a
draft resolution entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction” (A/C.1/59/L.16).
21. At its 18th meeting, on 27 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.16 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution VII).
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.19 and Rev.1
22. At the 15th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Mongolia introduced
a draft resolution entitled “Mongolia’s international security and nuclear-weapon-
free status” (A/C.1/59/L.19). Subsequently, Papua New Guinea joined in sponsoring
the draft resolution.
23. At its 19th meeting, on 28 October, the Committee had before it a revised draft
resolution (A/C.1/59/L.19/Rev.1) submitted by the sponsors of draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.19. Subsequently, the United States of America joined in sponsoring the
revised draft resolution, which contained the following changes:
(a) In operative paragraph 2, after the words “resolution 57/67”, the words
“, in particular the completion of the two studies on the non-nuclear aspects of
Mongolia’s international security” were added;
(b) In operative paragraph 5, before the words “consolidate and strengthen”,
the word “further” was deleted;
(c) In operative paragraph 5, the words “including its institutionalization at
the international level” were deleted.
24. At its 19th meeting, on 28 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.19/Rev.1 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution VIII).9
A/59/459
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.21 and Rev.1
25. At the 14th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Mali, on behalf of
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali,4 the Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Assistance to States for curbing the illicit
traffic in small arms and collecting them” (A/C.1/59/L.21).
26. At its 20th meeting, on 1 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution (A/C.1/59/L.21/Rev.1) submitted by the sponsors of draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.21 and El Salvador. Subsequently, Angola, Austria, Belgium, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, the Central African Republic, Cyprus, Denmark, Djibouti,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji, France, Gabon, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kenya, Malawi, Malta, Mauritius, the Netherlands, Norway, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, San Marino, Slovakia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the revised draft resolution, which contained the
following changes:
(a) A new fifteenth preambular paragraph was inserted, which read:
“Welcoming the convening of the Open-ended Working Group to
Negotiate an International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, which
held its first session from 14 to 25 June 2004,”
(b) Operative paragraph 2, which read:
“Welcomes the decision of the Economic Community of West African
States to renew the Declaration of a Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons in West
Africa for a three-year period, until October 2004, and encourages the
international community to support the implementation of the moratorium”
was replaced with:
“Encourages the international community to support the implementation
of the Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa”.
27. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.21/Rev.1 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution IX).
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.22
28. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Sweden, on behalf of
Brazil, Egypt, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, South Africa and Sweden, introduced
a draft resolution entitled “Accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament
commitments” (A/C.1/59/L.22). Subsequently, Austria, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Malta, Samoa and Ukraine joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution.
__________________
4 On behalf of the States Members of the United Nations which are members of the Economic
Community of West African States.10
A/59/459
29. At its 19th meeting, on 28 October, the Committee voted on draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.22 as follows:
(a) Operative paragraph 2 was adopted by a recorded vote of 153 to 4, with
5 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
France, India, Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Mauritius, Monaco, Pakistan, Uzbekistan.
(b) Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.22 as a whole was adopted by a recorded
vote of 135 to 5, with 25 abstentions (see para. 90, draft resolution X). The voting
was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon,
Germany, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan,11
A/59/459
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
France, Israel, Latvia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Estonia, Georgia,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Italy, Monaco, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Russian Federation, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Uzbekistan.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.23
30. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Japan, on behalf of
Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Italy, Japan, Nepal,
Switzerland and Ukraine, introduced a draft resolution entitled “A path to the total
elimination of nuclear weapons” (A/C.1/59/L.23). Subsequently, Belgium, Chile,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, the Niger, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Spain, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan and Zambia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
31. At its 19th meeting, on 28 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.23 by a recorded vote of 151 to 2, with 16 abstentions (see para. 90,
draft resolution XI). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of),12
A/59/459
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
India, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Brazil, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Malta, Mexico, Myanmar, New
Zealand, Pakistan, South Africa, Sweden.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.26 and Rev.1
32. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Myanmar, on behalf
of Algeria, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Colombia, the Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, Guinea, Haiti, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kenya, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Timor-Leste, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe, introduced a draft
resolution entitled “Nuclear disarmament” (A/C.1/59/L.26).
33. At its 20th meeting, on 1 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution (A/C.1/59/L.26/Rev.1) submitted by Algeria, Bangladesh, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Colombia, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guinea, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Jordan, Kenya, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Malaysia,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Timor-Leste, Uganda, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe, which contained the following
changes:
(a) The order of the preambular paragraphs was rearranged as follows:
(i) The ninth preambular paragraph became the eleventh preambular
paragraph;
(ii) The tenth preambular paragraph became the ninth;
(iii) The eleventh preambular paragraph became the tenth;
(b) The twentieth and twenty-first preambular paragraphs were deleted;
(c) In operative paragraph 19, the year “2004” was replaced with the year
“2005”.13
A/59/459
Subsequently, Bhutan, Cambodia, Ghana, Haiti, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Samoa,
Thailand and Uruguay joined in sponsoring the revised draft resolution.
34. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.26/Rev.1 by a recorded vote of 93 to 42, with 18 abstentions (see
para. 90, draft resolution XII). The vote was as follows:5
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia
and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Honduras, India, Ireland,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Malta, Mauritius, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Russian Federation, Sweden, Ukraine.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.28
35. At the 15th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Malaysia, on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Relationship between
disarmament and development” (A/C.1/59/L.28).
36. At its 18th meeting, on 27 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.28 by a recorded vote of 165 to 1, with 2 abstentions (see para. 90, draft
resolution XIII). The voting was as follows:
__________________
5 The delegation of Jordan subsequently indicated that, had it been present, it would have voted in
favour.14
A/59/459
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
France and Israel.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.30
37. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of India, on behalf of
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cuba, Fiji, Haiti, India, Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Namibia, the Sudan, Viet Nam and Zambia,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Reducing nuclear danger” (A/C.1/59/L.30).
Subsequently, Cambodia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius and Papua New Guinea
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
38. At its 17th meeting, on 26 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.30 by a recorded vote of 106 to 46, with 16 abstentions (see para. 90,
draft resolution XIV). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,15
A/59/459
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, China, Ecuador, Georgia, Israel,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Paraguay, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Ukraine, Uzbekistan.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.31
39. At the 15th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of India, on behalf of
Afghanistan, Bhutan, Colombia, Fiji, France, India, Mauritius, Myanmar, Nepal and
Sri Lanka, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Measures to prevent terrorists from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction” (A/C.1/59/L.31). Subsequently, Armenia,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Namibia, the
Netherlands, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, the Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
40. At its 19th meeting, on 28 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.31 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution XV).
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.34
41. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Canada, on behalf of
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic,
Germany, Grenada, Ireland, Kenya, Luxembourg, Morocco, New Zealand, the16
A/59/459
Republic of Korea, San Marino, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “The Conference on Disarmament decision
(CD/1547) of 11 August 1998 to establish, under item 1 of its agenda entitled
‘Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament’, an ad hoc committee
to negotiate, on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator (CD/1299) and the
mandate contained therein, a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally
and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices” (A/C.1/59/L.34). Subsequently,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Cyprus, Ecuador, Finland, Greece, Italy,
Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Malta, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Norway, Papua New
Guinea, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain and Venezuela joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
42. At its 22nd meeting, on 4 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.34 by a recorded vote of 147 to 1, with 2 abstentions (see para. 90, draft
resolution XVI). The voting was as follows:6
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia
and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
__________________
6 The delegation of Saudi Arabia subsequently indicated that, had it been present, it would have
voted in favour of the resolution.17
A/59/459
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.38
43. At the 14th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Germany, on behalf
of Afghanistan, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Israel, Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, the Niger, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
Zambia and Zimbabwe, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Consolidation of
peace through practical disarmament measures” (A/C.1/59/L.38). Subsequently,
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Azerbaijan, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, the
Central African Republic, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia, Grenada, Guinea,
Guyana, Honduras, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar,
Malawi, the Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nauru, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, the Philippines, the
Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Tajikistan, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay and Venezuela, joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
44. At its 20th meeting, on 1 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.38 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution XVII).
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.39
45. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Malaysia, on behalf
of Algeria, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, Fiji,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jamaica, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Liberia, Malawi, Malaysia, Mexico, Myanmar, Nepal,
Pakistan, Peru, Singapore, Viet Nam and Yemen, introduced a draft resolution
entitled “Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on
the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons” (A/C.1/59/L.39).
Subsequently, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Chile, Colombia, the Congo, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, Iraq,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lesotho, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Mongolia, Namibia, the Niger, Nigeria, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, the
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Uruguay and
Zambia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
46. At its 19th meeting, on 28 October, the Committee voted on draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.39 as follows:
(a) Operative paragraph 1 was adopted by a recorded vote of 156 to 3, with 5
abstentions. The voting was as follows:18
A/59/459
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Russian Federation, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Belarus, France, Latvia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uzbekistan.
(b) Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.39, as a whole, was adopted by a recorded
vote of 118 to 28, with 21 abstentions (see para. 90, draft resolution XVIII). The
voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San19
A/59/459
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Serbia
and Montenegro, Switzerland, Uzbekistan.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.40/Rev.1
47. At the 14th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Thailand, on behalf
of Afghanistan, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, the
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Eritrea, France,
Gabon, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mozambique, Namibia, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia
and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction” (A/C.1/59/L.40/Rev.1). Subsequently, Albania,
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Belarus, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Chad, the Comoros, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Dominica, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Madagascar,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Nauru, New Zealand, the Niger, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uruguay joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution.20
A/59/459
48. At the 20th meeting, on 1 November, the Secretary of the Committee made a
statement on the conference-servicing implications of the draft resolution (see
A/C.1/59/PV.20).
49. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.40/Rev.1 by a recorded vote of 140 to 1, with 18 abstentions (see
para. 90, draft resolution XIX). The voting was follows:7
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Abstaining:
Azerbaijan, China, Cuba, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Myanmar,
Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic,
United States of America, Viet Nam.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.41
50. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Brazil, on behalf of
Angola, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Guatemala,
Indonesia, Liberia, Mexico, Mongolia, New Zealand, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Singapore, South Africa and Venezuela, introduced a draft resolution entitled
“Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas” (A/C.1/59/L.41).
__________________
7 The delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea subsequently indicated that it had
intended to abstain instead of voting against the resolution. The delegations of Papua New
Guinea and Somalia subsequently indicated that, had they been present, they would have voted
in favour of the resolution.21
A/59/459
Subsequently, the Bahamas, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, the Central African Republic, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Samoa,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Thailand, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
51. At its 20th meeting, on 1 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.41 as follows:8
(a) The last three words of operative paragraph 5, “and South Asia”, were
adopted by a recorded vote of 139 to 2, with 9 abstentions. The voting was as
follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
India, Pakistan.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Bulgaria, France, Israel, Myanmar, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
(b) Operative paragraph 5, as a whole, was adopted by a recorded vote of
144 to 1, with 8 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
__________________
8 The delegation of Papua New Guinea subsequently indicated that, had it been present, it would
have voted in favour of the resolution.22
A/59/459
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
India.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, France, Israel, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
(c) Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.41, as a whole, was adopted by a recorded
vote of 149 to 3, with 6 abstentions (see para. 90, draft resolution XX). The voting
was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore,23
A/59/459
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, India, Israel, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.43 and Rev.1
52. At the 14th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Colombia, on behalf
of Argentina, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Japan, Kenya,
Liberia, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Republic of
Moldova, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia
and Zimbabwe, introduced a draft resolution entitled “The illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects” (A/C.1/59/L.43). Subsequently, Afghanistan,
Algeria, Andorra, Australia, the Bahamas, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, the Congo, Djibouti,
Guyana, India, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Malta, Morocco, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa,
Sierra Leone, Suriname, Thailand, Ukraine, Uruguay and Venezuela joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
53. At its 21st meeting, on 3 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution (A/C.1/59/L.43/Rev.1), submitted by the sponsors of draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L43 and Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Nepal, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, the Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which contained the
following revisions:
(a) In operative paragraph 2, the words “weeks’ duration” was replaced with
the words “weeks in duration”;
(b) In operative paragraph 5, after the words “light weapons”, the words “[to
be further discussed]” were deleted and the following text was inserted:
“with a view to establishing, after the 2006 review conference and no later
than 2007, and after the conclusion of the work of the Open-ended Working
Group, a group of governmental experts, appointed by him on the basis of
equitable geographical representation, to consider further steps to enhance
international cooperation in preventing, combating and eradicating illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons, and requests the Secretary-General
to report to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session on the outcome of his
consultations”;24
A/59/459
(c) In operative paragraph 6, after the words “Programme of Action”, the
words “and invites all Member States that have not yet done so to examine the
possibility of developing and adopting regional and subregional measures, as
appropriate, to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects” were inserted.
54. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Committee made a statement on the
conference-servicing implications of the draft resolution (see A/C.1/59/PV.21).
55. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.43/Rev.1 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution XXI).
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.45/Rev.1 and 2
56. At the 16th meeting, on 25 October, the representative of Pakistan, on behalf
of Liberia and Pakistan, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Confidence-building
measures in the regional and subregional context” (A/C.1/59/L.45/Rev.1).
57. At its 21st meeting, on 3 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution (A/C.1/59/L.45/Rev.2) submitted by the sponsors of draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.45/Rev.1, containing the following changes:
(a) A new second preambular paragraph was added, reading:
“Recalling its resolution 58/43 of 8 December 2003”;
(b) The fourth (former third) preambular paragraph, which read:
“Recalling also the Security Council resolutions relating to the
prevention of armed conflict, and noting all Security Council presidential
statements relating to this matter”,
was replaced by:
“Recalling further the resolutions and guidelines adopted by
consensus by the General Assembly and the Disarmament Commission
relating to confidence-building measures and their implementation at the
global, regional and subregional levels”;
(c) In the fifth (former fourth) preambular paragraph, the words
“participation of all States” were replaced by the words “agreement of all States”;
(d) In operative paragraph 4, the words “, while at the same time avoiding
actions which may hinder or impair such a dialogue” were inserted after the word
“dialogue”;
(e) Operative paragraph 6, which read:
“Emphasizes that confidence-building measures should contribute
to the objectives of strategic stability, consistent with the principle of
undiminished security at the lowest level of armament”,
was replaced by:
“Emphasizes that the objective of confidence-building measures
should be to help strengthen international peace and security and be
consistent with the principle of undiminished security at the lowest level
of armament”;25
A/59/459
(f) In operative paragraph 7, the word “unilateral” was deleted before the
word “bilateral” and the words “with the consent and participation of the parties
concerned,” were inserted after the words “confidence-building measures,”.
58. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.45/Rev.2 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution XXII).
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.46
59. At the 14th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Pakistan, on behalf
of Bangladesh, Germany, Liberia, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Ukraine, introduced a draft resolution entitled
“Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels” (A/C.1/59/L.46).
Subsequently, Belarus, Italy, Papua New Guinea and Spain joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution.
60. At its 18th meeting, on 27 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.46 by a recorded vote of 165 to 1, with 1 abstention (see para. 90, draft
resolution XXIII). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
India.
Abstaining:
Bhutan.26
A/59/459
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.47
61. At the 14th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Pakistan, on behalf
of Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Jordan, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, Saudi Arabia, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan and Turkey, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Regional
disarmament” (A/C.1/59/L.47).
62. At its 18th meeting, on 27 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.47 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution XXIV).
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.49 and Rev.2
63. At the 14th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Australia, on behalf
of Argentina, Australia, Kenya, Thailand and Turkey, introduced a draft resolution
entitled “Prevention of the illicit transfer and unauthorized access to and use of
man-portable air defence systems” (A/C.1/59/L.49), which read:
“The General Assembly,
“Recalling its resolutions 58/42 of 8 December 2003 and 58/241 of
23 December 2003,
“Emphasizing the importance of the full implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects,
“Acknowledging the authorized trade in man-portable air defence systems
between Governments and the legitimate right of Governments to possess such
weapons in the interests of their national security,
“Recognizing the threat posed by unauthorized access to and use of man-
portable air defence systems to civil aviation, peacekeeping, crisis
management and security,
“Taking into account that man-portable air defence systems are easily
carried, concealed, fired and, in certain circumstances, obtained,
“Recognizing that disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation are
essential for the maintenance of international peace and security,
“Recognizing that effective control over man-portable air defence
systems acquires special importance in the context of the intensified
international fight against global terrorism,
“Convinced of the importance of effective national control of transfers of
man-portable air defence systems and the safe and effective management of
stockpiles of such weapons,
“Welcoming the ongoing efforts of various international and regional
forums, including the Group of Eight, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms
and Dual-use Goods and Technologies, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of American States and the Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation, to enhance transport security and to strengthen27
A/59/459
management of man-portable air defence systems stockpiles in order to
prevent unauthorized access to and use of such weapons,
“Noting the importance of information exchange and transparency in the
trade of man-portable air defence systems to build confidence and security
among States and to prevent unauthorized access to such weapons,
“Welcoming the decision of the General Assembly in resolution 58/54 of
8 December 2003, inter alia, to expand the scope of the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms to include man-portable air defence systems,
“1. Urges Member States to support current international, regional and
national efforts to combat and prevent the illicit trade in man-portable air
defence systems and unauthorized access to and use of such weapons;
“2. Stresses the importance of effective and comprehensive national
controls on the production, transfer and brokering of man-portable air defence
systems in order to prevent the illicit trade and unauthorized access to and use
of such weapons;
“3. Encourages Member States to enact or improve legislation,
regulation, procedures and stockpile management practices in order to exercise
effective control over access to and transfer of man-portable air defence
systems;
“4. Also encourages Member States to enact or improve legislation,
regulations and procedures to ban the transfer of man-portable air defence
systems to non-State end-users, and to ensure that such weapons are exported
only to Governments or agents authorized by a Government;
“5. Encourages initiatives to mobilize resources and technical expertise
to assist States, at their request, in enhancing national controls and stockpile
management practices to prevent unauthorized access to, use and transfer of
man-portable air defence systems and to destroy excess or obsolete stockpiles
of such weapons;
“6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session
the item entitled ‘Prevention of the illicit transfer and unauthorized access to
and use of man-portable air defence systems’.”
Subsequently, the Russian Federation joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
64. At its 21st meeting, on 3 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution (A/C.1/59/L.49/Rev.2), submitted by the sponsors of A/C.1/59/L.49
and Angola, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Nauru, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Zambia. Subsequently,
Armenia, Brazil, Japan, Liechtenstein, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Samoa, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines joined in sponsoring the revised draft
resolution.28
A/59/459
65. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.49/Rev.2 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution XXV).
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.50
66. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Chile, on behalf of
Albania, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, the Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, the Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, the
Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Morocco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, the Niger, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela and
Zambia, introduced a draft resolution entitled “The Hague Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation” (A/C.1/59/L.50). Subsequently, Djibouti, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Iraq, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Mongolia, Nigeria, Papua New
Guinea, the Philippines, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Uzbekistan and
Vanuatu joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
67. At the 17th meeting, on 26 October, the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, on behalf of Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia and
Pakistan orally proposed amendments to the draft resolution, by which:
(a) In the seventh preambular paragraph, the words “development and”
would be inserted before the word “proliferation” and the words “in a
comprehensive manner” would be added at the end of the paragraph;
(b) In operative paragraph 1, the word “first” would be inserted before the
words “practical step”;
(c) In operative paragraph 4, the words “exploration of” would be replaced
by the words “United Nations to explore”.
68. At the same meeting, the Committee voted on draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.50
as follows:
(a) The amendment proposed to the seventh preambular paragraph was
rejected by a recorded vote of 103 to 21, with 8 abstentions. The voting was as
follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Cuba, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Kuwait, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Turkmenistan, Viet Nam.29
A/59/459
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Belarus, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Mauritius, Nepal, Philippines, Russian
Federation, Singapore.
(b) The amendment proposed to operative paragraph 1 was rejected by a
recorded vote of 104 to 17, with 10 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kuwait, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.30
A/59/459
Abstaining:
Belarus, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, India, Mauritius, Nepal,
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand.
(c) The amendment proposed to operative paragraph 4 was rejected by a
recorded vote of 103 to 23, with 6 abstentions. The voting was as follows:9
In favour:
Algeria, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China,
Cuba, Egypt, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kuwait,
Malaysia, Mexico, Nepal, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka,
Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritius, Singapore, Thailand.
(d) Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.50, as a whole, was adopted by a recorded
vote of 137 to 2, with 16 abstentions (see para. 90, draft resolution XXVI). The
voting was as follows:10
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
__________________
9 The delegation of Haiti subsequently indicated that it had intended to vote against the proposed
amendment.
10 The delegation of Oman stated that it did not intend to participate in the vote.31
A/59/459
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Zambia.
Against:
Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Gambia,
India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Pakistan, Qatar, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tuvalu.
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.52
69. At the 15th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Argentina, on behalf
of Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Bangladesh, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, the Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Kenya, Liberia, Latvia,
Lithuania, Madagascar, Malawi, Malta, Mexico, the Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, and Zambia, introduced a draft resolution entitled
“Information on confidence-building measures in the field of conventional arms”
(A/C.1/59/L.52). Subsequently, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Austria, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Canada, Cambodia, Fiji, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Iceland,
Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the Niger, Nigeria, Palau, the
Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Uganda and the United States of America, joined in
sponsoring the resolution.
70. At the 18th meeting, on 27 October, the Secretary of the Committee made a
statement concerning the conference-servicing implications of the draft resolution
(see A/C.1/59/PV.18).
71. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.52
without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution XXVII).32
A/59/459
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.53/Rev.1
72. At the 22nd meeting, on 4 November, the representative of Mexico, on behalf
of Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Egypt, Estonia,
France, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Japan, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Mexico, Monaco,
New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sweden, Thailand, Ukraine and Zambia,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “United Nations study on disarmament and
non-proliferation education” (A/C.1/59/L.53/Rev.1), and orally revised operative
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution by inserting the word “official” before the word
“languages”.
73. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.53/Rev.1, as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution
XXVIII).
Draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.56
74. At the 12th meeting, on 20 October, the representative of the Russian
Federation, on behalf of the Russian Federation and the United States of America,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Bilateral strategic nuclear arms reductions
and the new strategic framework” (A/C.1/59/L.56).
75. At its 21st meeting, on 3 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/59/L.56 without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution XXIX).
Draft resolutions A/C.1/59/L.1, A/C.1/59/L.13 and A/C.1/59/L.60
76. At the 15th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of the United States of
America introduced a draft resolution entitled “Improving the effectiveness of the
methods of work of the First Committee” (A/C.1/59/L.1), which read:
“The General Assembly,
“Recalling its resolutions 58/41 of 8 December 2003, 58/126 of 19
December 2003 and 58/316 of 1 July 2004,
“Mindful of its decision, in resolution 58/316, that each Main Committee
shall give specific attention to the rationalization of their future agendas by the
biennialization, triennialization, clustering and the elimination of items; and
make recommendations to the plenary Assembly for its decision by 1 April
2005,
“1. Decides to adopt the following measures to improve the operation
of the First Committee, namely to:
“(a) Limit the number of studies commissioned by the First Committee
to one per year;
“(b) Set a numerical limit on the number of draft resolutions and
decisions tabled each year;
“(c) Introduce resolutions traditionally adopted by consensus only on a
biennial or triennial basis;
“(d) Institute automatic ‘sunset’ provisions for all United Nations
activities generated by the First Committee;33
A/59/459
“(e) Begin the implementation of the provisions of paragraph 20 of its
resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002 by consolidating reports initiated by
the First Committee with other reports on related issues that the Secretariat is
required to produce during a given session of the General Assembly;
“(f) Elect the full Bureau of the First Committee one year in advance, at
the conclusion of each annual session of the Committee;
“(g) Instruct the Secretariat to review the statement of programme
budget implications process with a view to improving the accuracy of its
projections and increasing the advance notice provided to Member States
regarding the financial implications of draft resolutions and decisions;
“2. Decides also that the Member States will determine the operational
modalities for implementing the measures contained in paragraph 1 of the
present resolution during the fifty-ninth/sixtieth intersessional period, in
consultation with, as appropriate, the General Committee of the General
Assembly, the Bureau of the First Committee and the Secretariat;
“3. Recommends to the plenary Assembly, for its decision by 1 April
2005, the proposal contained in the annex to the present resolution for
clustering agenda items customarily referred to the First Committee;
“4. Decides to implement all of the foregoing measures by the
commencement of its sixtieth session.
“Annex
First Committee: recommendations for clustering
agenda items
“(Based on the current agenda (A/59/251), unless otherwise noted)
“I. Retained current agenda item: ‘General and complete
disarmament’(65)
“1. The following existing agenda items would be folded into the item
above: 24, ‘Prevention of armed conflict’ (currently handled in the plenary),
60, 61, 64, 65, 65 (b), ‘Further measures in the field of disarmament for the
prevention of an arms race on the seabed and the ocean floor and in the subsoil
thereof’ (currently handled in the plenary), 65 (e), 65 (h), 65 (1), 65 (n), 65 (o)
and 65 (cc).
“2. From the agenda of the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly, the
following item would be folded into the item above: 67, ‘Review of the
implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security’.
“II. Proposed new agenda item: ‘Nuclear issues’
“3. The following existing agenda items would be folded into the new item
proposed above: 63, 65 (a), 65 (p), 65 (q), 65 (t), 65 (x), 65 (aa), 66 (g) and 71.
“4. From the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly, under item 73,
‘General and complete disarmament’, the question ‘A path to the total34
A/59/459
elimination of nuclear weapons’ and items 73 (b), ‘Prohibition of the dumping
of radioactive wastes’, 73 (c), ‘Reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons’,
and 73 (j), ‘Bilateral strategic nuclear arms reductions and the new strategic
framework’, would be folded into the new item proposed above.
“III. Proposed new agenda item: ‘Other weapons of mass destruction’
“5. The following existing agenda items would be folded into the new item
proposed above: 65 (d), 65 (r), 65 (u), 72.
“IV. Proposed new agenda item: ‘Conventional arms control’
“6. The following existing agenda items would be folded into the new item
proposed above: 65 (g), 65 (j), 65 (v), 65 (y), 65 (z) and 69.
“V. Proposed new agenda item: ‘Confidence-building measures’
“7. The following existing agenda items would be folded into the new item
proposed above: 57, 59, 65 (m), 65 (w), 66 (h).
“8. From the agenda of the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly, the
following item would be folded into the new item proposed above: 62 (b),
‘Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military
expenditures’.
“VI. Proposed new agenda item: ‘Regional security measures’
“9. The following existing agenda items would be folded into the new item
proposed above: 58, 62, 65 (f), 65 (i), 65 (s), 65 (bb), 68, 70.
“10. From the agenda of the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly, the
following items would be folded into the new item proposed above: 64,
‘Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace’,
65, ‘African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty’, and 66, ‘Consolidation of the
regime established by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco)’.
“11. From the agenda of the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly,
the following item would be folded into the new item proposed above: 59,
‘Question of Antarctica’.
“VII. Proposed new agenda item: ‘Disarmament machinery’
“12. The following existing agenda items would be folded into the new item
proposed above: 56 (m), 56 (r), 65 (c), 65 (k), 65 (dd), 66, 66 (a)-(f), 67 and
67 (a)-(d).”
77. At the 23rd meeting, on 5 November, draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.1 was
withdrawn by its sponsor.
78. At the 15th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Malaysia, on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Improving the
effectiveness of the methods of work of the First Committee” (A/C.1/59/L.13),
which read:35
A/59/459
“The General Assembly,
“Recalling its most recent resolutions 58/41 of 8 December 2003, 58/126
of 19 December 2003 and 58/316 of 1 July 2004,
“Aware of the importance of enhancing the effectiveness and role of the
First Committee of the General Assembly and improving its working methods,
“1. Decides to continue its efforts to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the methods of work of the First Committee as a means of
enhancing the role of the Committee in promoting peace and security;
“2. Emphasizes that improved functioning of the First Committee
should be considered in an integrated and comprehensive manner through the
existing three stages, namely general debate, thematic/structure debate and
consideration and action on resolutions;
“3. Requests Member States to elect the Chairman and other members
of the Bureau of the First Committee at least three months before the meeting
of the session to allow more focused consultations by the Chairman with
Member States;
“4. Invites Member States to hold more interactive debates based on a
programme and format elaborated through informal consultations between the
Bureau and Member States;
“5. Urges Member States to submit draft resolutions in a more concise
and action-oriented manner;
“6. Invites Member States to consider the biennialization or
triennialization of the agenda items discussed in the First Committee, on a
voluntary basis, and in particular when no specific action is required to be
taken for the implementation of the relevant resolutions;
“7. Recommends that the First Committee hold more informal
consultations, both before and during Committee meetings, with the
participation of all interested Member States for furthering discussions on draft
resolutions already submitted or yet to be submitted to the Committee;
“8. Urges the First Committee to continue its existing methods of work
in clustering its agenda items as a means of facilitating the thematic
discussions and action on the draft resolutions;
“9. Considers that any change in the disarmament agenda and the
disarmament machinery, including the First Committee, shall be made in the
context of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament;
“10. Decides to continue its consideration of the issue and to include in
the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session an item entitled ‘Improving the
effectiveness of the methods of work of the First Committee’.”
79. At the 23rd meeting, on 5 November, draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.13 was
withdrawn by its sponsor.
80. At the 23rd meeting, on 5 November, the representative of Indonesia
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Improving the effectiveness of the methods of36
A/59/459
work of the First Committee” (A/C.1/59/L.60). Subsequently, Albania, Andorra,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, the
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania, the United States of
America, Uruguay, Viet Nam and Yemen joined in sponsoring the resolution.
81. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.1/59/L.60
without a vote (see para. 90, draft resolution XXX).
B. Draft decisions
Draft decision A/C.1/59/L.7
82. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Uzbekistan, on
behalf of Kazakhstan, Krygyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan,
introduced a draft decision entitled “Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
Central Asia” (A/C.1/59/L.7).
83. At its 17th meeting, on 26 October, the Committee adopted draft decision
A/C.1/59/L.7 without a vote (see para. 91, draft decision I).
Draft decision A/C.1/59/L.15
84. At the 11th meeting, on 19 October, the representative of Mexico introduced a
draft decision entitled “United Nations conference to identify ways of eliminating
nuclear dangers in the context of disarmament” (A/C.1/59/L.15).
85. At its 17th meeting, on 26 October, the Committee adopted draft decision
A/C.1/59/L.15 by a recorded vote of 119 to 6, with 41 abstentions (see para. 91,
draft decision II). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran37
A/59/459
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
France, Israel, Monaco, Poland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu.
Draft decision A/C.1/59/L.48
86. At the 14th meeting, on 22 October, the representative of Bulgaria, on behalf
of Bulgaria, France and the Netherlands, introduced a draft decision entitled
“Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in
surplus” (A/C.1/59/L.48). Subsequently, Germany joined in sponsoring the draft
decision.
87. At its 18th meeting, on 27 October, the Committee adopted draft decision
A/C.1/59/L.48 without a vote (see para. 91, draft decision III).
C. Notification of nuclear tests
88. No proposal was submitted and no action was taken under sub-item (a).
D. Further measures in the field of disarmament for the prevention
of an arms race on the seabed and the ocean floor and in the
subsoil thereof
89. No proposal was submitted and no action was taken under sub-item (b).38
A/59/459
III. Recommendations of the First Committee
90. The First Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolutions:
Draft resolution I
National legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment and
dual-use goods and technology
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation are essential
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
Recalling that effective national control of the transfer of arms, military
equipment and dual-use goods and technology, including those transfers that could
contribute to proliferation activities, is an important tool for achieving those
objectives,
Recalling also that the States parties to the international disarmament and non-
proliferation treaties have undertaken to facilitate the fullest possible exchange of
materials, equipment and technological information for peaceful purposes, in
accordance with the provisions of those treaties,
Considering that the exchange of national legislation, regulations and
procedures on the transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods and
technology contributes to mutual understanding and confidence among Member
States,
Convinced that such an exchange would be beneficial to Member States that
are in the process of developing such legislation,
Reaffirming the inherent right of individual or collective self-defence in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Invites Member States that are in a position to do so, without prejudice to
the provisions contained in Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April
2004, to enact or improve national legislation, regulations and procedures to
exercise effective control over the transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use
goods and technology, while ensuring that such legislation, regulations and
procedures are consistent with the obligations of States parties under international
treaties;
2. Encourages Member States to provide, on a voluntary basis, information
to the Secretary-General on their national legislation, regulations and procedures on
the transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods and technology, as well
as the changes therein, and requests the Secretary-General to make this information
accessible to Member States;
3. Decides to remain attentive to the matter.39
A/59/459
Draft resolution II
Missiles
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/54 F of 1 December 1999, 55/33 A of
20 November 2000, 56/24 B of 29 November 2001, 57/71 of 22 November 2002 and
58/37 of 8 December 2003,
Reaffirming the role of the United Nations in the field of arms regulation and
disarmament and the commitment of Member States to take concrete steps to
strengthen that role,
Realizing the need to promote regional and international peace and security in
a world free from the scourge of war and the burden of armaments,
Convinced of the need for a comprehensive approach towards missiles, in a
balanced and non-discriminatory manner, as a contribution to international peace
and security,
Bearing in mind that the security concerns of Member States at the
international and regional levels should be taken into consideration in addressing the
issue of missiles,
Underlining the complexities involved in considering the issue of missiles in
the conventional context,
Expressing its support for the international efforts against the development and
proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction,
Considering that the Secretary-General, in response to resolution 58/37,
established in 2004 a Panel of Governmental Experts, which had a comprehensive,
in-depth exchange of views on the issue of missiles in all its aspects,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the issue of missiles in
all its aspects,1 in which he stated that given the complexity of the issues at hand, no
consensus had been reached on the preparation of a final report by the Panel,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General containing the replies
from Member States on the report on the issue of missiles in all its aspects,
submitted pursuant to resolution 58/37;2
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report, with the support of
qualified consultants and the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, as
appropriate, taking into account the views expressed by Member States, to
contribute to the United Nations endeavour to address the issue of missiles in all its
aspects, by identifying areas where consensus can be reached, and to submit it to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a Panel of
Governmental Experts, to be established in 2007 on the basis of equitable
geographical distribution, to further explore further ways and means to address
within the United Nations the issue of missiles in all its aspects, including
__________________
1 A/59/278 and Corr.1.
2 See A/59/137.40
A/59/459
identifying areas where consensus can be reached, and to submit a report for
consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-third session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Missiles”.41
A/59/459
Draft resolution III
Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/70 M of 12 December 1995, 51/45 E of
10 December 1996, 52/38 E of 9 December 1997, 53/77 J of 4 December 1998,
54/54 S of 1 December 1999, 55/33 K of 20 November 2000, 56/24 F of
29 November 2001, 57/64 of 22 November 2002 and 58/45 of 8 December 2003,
Emphasizing the importance of the observance of environmental norms in the
preparation and implementation of disarmament and arms limitation agreements,
Recognizing that it is necessary to take duly into account the agreements
adopted at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, as
well as prior relevant agreements, in the drafting and implementation of agreements
on disarmament and arms limitation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,1
Mindful of the detrimental environmental effects of the use of nuclear
weapons,
1. Reaffirms that international disarmament forums should take fully into
account the relevant environmental norms in negotiating treaties and agreements on
disarmament and arms limitation and that all States, through their actions, should
contribute fully to ensuring compliance with the aforementioned norms in the
implementation of treaties and conventions to which they are parties;
2. Calls upon States to adopt unilateral, bilateral, regional and multilateral
measures so as to contribute to ensuring the application of scientific and
technological progress within the framework of international security, disarmament
and other related spheres, without detriment to the environment or to its effective
contribution to attaining sustainable development;
3. Welcomes the information provided by Member States on the
implementation of the measures they have adopted to promote the objectives
envisaged in the present resolution;1
4. Invites all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General
information on the measures they have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged
in the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
containing this information to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control”.
__________________
1 A/59/129 and Add.1.42
A/59/459
Draft resolution IV
Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament
and non-proliferation
The General Assembly,
Determined to foster strict respect for the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 56/24 T of 29 November 2001 on multilateral
cooperation in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation and global efforts
against terrorism and other relevant resolutions, as well as its resolutions 57/63 of
22 November 2002 and 58/44 of 8 December 2003 on promotion of multilateralism
in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation,
Recalling also the purpose of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security and, to that end, to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace and for the suppression of acts of
aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means,
and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or
settlement of international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the
peace, as enshrined in the Charter,
Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration,1 which states,
inter alia, that the responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social
development, as well as threats to international peace and security, must be shared
among the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally and that, as
the most universal and most representative organization in the world, the United
Nations must play the central role,
Convinced that, in the globalization era and with the information revolution,
arms regulation, non-proliferation and disarmament problems are more than ever the
concern of all countries in the world, which are affected in one way or another by
these problems and, therefore, should have the possibility to participate in the
negotiations that arise to tackle them,
Bearing in mind the existence of a broad structure of disarmament and arms
regulation agreements resulting from non-discriminatory and transparent
multilateral negotiations with the participation of a large number of countries,
regardless of their size and power,
Aware of the need to advance further in the field of arms regulation, non-
proliferation and disarmament on the basis of universal, multilateral, non-
discriminatory and transparent negotiations with the goal of reaching general and
complete disarmament under strict international control,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral
negotiations on disarmament,
Recognizing also that the proliferation and development of weapons of mass
destruction, including nuclear weapons, are among the most immediate threats to
international peace and security which need to be dealt with, with the highest
priority,
__________________
1 See resolution 55/2.43
A/59/459
Considering that the multilateral disarmament agreements provide the
mechanism for States parties to consult one another and to cooperate in solving any
problems which may arise in relation to the objective of, or in the application of, the
provisions of the agreements and that such consultations and cooperation may also
be undertaken through appropriate international procedures within the framework of
the United Nations and in accordance with the Charter,
Stressing that international cooperation, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
dialogue and confidence-building measures would contribute essentially to the
creation of multilateral and bilateral friendly relations among peoples and nations,
Concerned at the continuous erosion of multilateralism in the field of arms
regulation, non-proliferation and disarmament, and recognizing that a resort to
unilateral actions by Member States in resolving their security concerns would
jeopardize international peace and security and undermine confidence in the
international security system as well as the foundations of the United Nations itself,
Reaffirming the absolute validity of multilateral diplomacy in the field of
disarmament and non-proliferation, and determined to promote multilateralism as an
essential way to develop arms regulation and disarmament negotiations,
1. Reaffirms multilateralism as the core principle in negotiations in the area
of disarmament and non-proliferation with a view to maintaining and strengthening
universal norms and enlarging their scope;
2. Also reaffirms multilateralism as the core principle in resolving
disarmament and non-proliferation concerns;
3. Urges the participation of all interested States in multilateral negotiations
on arms regulation, non-proliferation and disarmament in a non-discriminatory and
transparent manner;
4. Underlines the importance of preserving the existing agreements on arms
regulation and disarmament, which constitute an expression of the results of
international cooperation and multilateral negotiations in response to the challenges
facing mankind;
5. Calls once again upon all Member States to renew and fulfil their
individual and collective commitments to multilateral cooperation as an important
means of pursuing and achieving their common objectives in the area of
disarmament and non-proliferation;
6. Requests the States parties to the relevant instruments on weapons of
mass destruction to consult and cooperate among themselves in resolving their
concerns with regard to cases of non-compliance as well as on implementation, in
accordance with the procedures defined in those instruments, and to refrain from
resorting or threatening to resort to unilateral actions or directing unverified non-
compliance accusations against one another to resolve their concerns;
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General containing the replies of
Member States on the promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation, submitted pursuant to resolution 58/44;2
__________________
2 A/59/128 and Add.1.44
A/59/459
8. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States on
the issue of the promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-
proliferation and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-
proliferation”.45
A/59/459
Draft resolution V
Measures to uphold the authority of the 1925 Geneva Protocol
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, in particular resolution 57/62
of 22 November 2002,
Determined to act with a view to achieving effective progress towards general
and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control,
Recalling the long-standing determination of the international community to
achieve the effective prohibition of the development, production, stockpiling and
use of chemical and biological weapons as well as the continuing support for
measures to uphold the authority of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in
War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of
Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,1 as expressed by consensus in many
previous resolutions,
Emphasizing the necessity of easing international tension and strengthening
trust and confidence between States,
Welcoming the recent initiatives by three more States Parties to withdraw their
reservations to the 1925 Geneva Protocol,
1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General;2
2. Renews its previous call to all States to observe strictly the principles and
objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare,1
and
reaffirms the vital necessity of upholding its provisions;
3. Calls upon those States that continue to maintain reservations to the 1925
Geneva Protocol to withdraw them;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
__________________
1 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929), No. 2138.
2 A/59/179.46
A/59/459
Draft resolution VI
Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 I of 15 December 1994, 50/70 F of
12 December 1995, 51/45 C of 10 December 1996, 52/38 F of 9 December 1997,
53/77 AA of 4 December 1998, 54/54 U of 1 December 1999, 55/33 M of
20 November 2000, 56/24 D of 29 November 2001 and 57/61 of 22 November 2002
and its decision 58/521 of 8 December 2003,
Recalling also that, there being a consensus to do so in each case, three special
sessions of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament were held in 1978, 1982
and 1988,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, adopted by consensus at the first special session devoted to
disarmament,1
Bearing in mind also the ultimate objective of general and complete
disarmament under effective international control,
Taking note of paragraph 98 of the Final Document of the Thirteenth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Kuala Lumpur, from 20 to 25 February 2003,2 and paragraph 91 of the Final
Document of the Fourteenth Ministerial Conference of the Movement of Non-
Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa, from 17 to 19 August 2004, which
supported the convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament, which would offer an opportunity to review, from a
perspective more in tune with the current international situation, the most critical
aspects of the process of disarmament and to mobilize the international community
and public opinion in favour of the elimination of nuclear and other weapons of
mass destruction and of the control and reduction of conventional weapons,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by the heads of
State and Government during the Millennium Summit of the United Nations, held in
New York from 6 to 8 September 2000,3 in which they resolved “to strive for the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, and to
keep all options open for achieving this aim, including the possibility of convening
an international conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers”,
Reiterating its conviction that a special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament can set the future course of action in the fields of
disarmament, arms control, non-proliferation and related international security
matters,
Emphasizing the importance of multilateralism in the process of disarmament,
arms control, non-proliferation and related international security matters,
__________________
1 Resolution S-10/2.
2 See A/57/759-S/2003/332, annex I.
3 See resolution 55/2.47
A/59/459
Taking note of the report of the Open-ended Working Group to consider the
objectives and agenda, including the possible establishment of the preparatory
committee, for the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament,4
1. Decides to establish an open-ended working group, working on the basis
of consensus, to consider the objectives and agenda, including the possible
establishment of the preparatory committee, for the fourth special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament, taking note of the paper presented by
the Chairman of Working Group II during the 1999 substantive session of the
Disarmament Commission5 and the written proposals and views submitted by
Member States as contained in the working papers presented during the three
substantive sessions of the Open-ended Working Group in 2003,6 as well as the
reports of the Secretary-General regarding the views of Member States on the
objectives, agenda and timing of the fourth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament;7
2. Requests the Open-ended Working Group to hold an organizational
session in order to set the dates for its substantive sessions in 2006, and to submit a
report on its work, including possible substantive recommendations, before the end
of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to provide the
Open-ended Working Group with the necessary assistance and services as may be
required to discharge its tasks;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament”.
__________________
4 A/57/848.
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42),
annex II.
6 See A/AC.268/2003/WP.2.
7 A/55/130 and Add.1, A/56/166 and A/57/120.48
A/59/459
Draft resolution VII
Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject of chemical weapons, in
particular resolution 58/52 of 8 December 2003, adopted without a vote, in which it
noted with appreciation the ongoing work to achieve the objective and purpose of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction,1
Determined to achieve the effective prohibition of the development,
production, acquisition, transfer, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and their
destruction,
Noting with satisfaction that, since the adoption of resolution 58/52, nine
additional States have ratified the Convention or acceded to it, bringing the total
number of States parties to the Convention to one hundred and sixty-seven,
Reaffirming the importance of the outcome of the First Special Session of the
Conference of the States Parties to Review the Operation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, including the Political Declaration,2 in which the States parties
reaffirmed their commitment to achieving the objective and purpose of the
Convention, and the final report,3 which addressed all aspects of the Convention and
made important recommendations on its continued implementation,
1. Emphasizes that the universality of the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction1
is fundamental to the achievement of its objective and purpose,
and acknowledges progress made in the implementation of the action plan for the
universality of the Convention, and calls upon all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the Convention without delay;
2. Underlines that the Convention and its implementation contribute to
enhancing international peace and security, and emphasizes that its full, universal
and effective implementation will contribute further to that purpose by excluding
completely, for the sake of all humankind, the possibility of the use of chemical
weapons;
3. Stresses that the full and effective implementation of all provisions of the
Convention is in itself an important contribution to the efforts of the United Nations
in the global fight against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations;
4. Also stresses the importance to the Convention that all possessors of
chemical weapons, chemical weapons production facilities or chemical weapons
development facilities, including previously declared possessor States, should be
among the States parties to the Convention, and welcomes progress to that end;
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1974, No. 33757.
2 See Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, document RC-1/3.
3 Ibid., document RC-1/5.49
A/59/459
5. Notes that the effective application of the verification system builds
confidence in compliance with the Convention by States parties;
6. Stresses the importance of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in verifying compliance with the provisions of the Convention
as well as in promoting the timely and efficient accomplishment of all its objectives;
7. Urges all States parties to the Convention to meet in full and on time
their obligations under the Convention and to support the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its implementation activities;
8. Reaffirms the undertaking of the States parties to foster international
cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities of the States
parties and the importance of that cooperation and its contribution to the promotion
of the Convention as a whole;
9. Notes with appreciation the ongoing work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to achieve the objective and purpose of the
Convention, to ensure the full implementation of its provisions, including those for
international verification of compliance with it, and to provide a forum for
consultation and cooperation among States parties, and also notes with appreciation
progress made in the implementation of the plan of action regarding the
implementation of article VII obligations;
10. Welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons within the framework of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the Organization, in
accordance with the provisions of the Convention;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction”.50
A/59/459
Draft resolution VIII
Mongolia’s international security and nuclear-weapon-free status
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/77 D of 4 December 1998, 55/33 S of
20 November 2000 and 57/67 of 22 November 2002,
Recalling also the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations,1
Bearing in mind its resolution 49/31 of 9 December 1994 on the protection and
security of small States,
Proceeding from the fact that nuclear-weapon-free status is one of the means
of ensuring the national security of States,
Convinced that the internationally recognized status of Mongolia will
contribute to enhancing stability and confidence-building in the region as well as
promote Mongolia’s security by strengthening its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, the inviolability of its borders and the preservation of its
ecological balance,
Taking note of the adoption by the Mongolian parliament of legislation
defining and regulating its nuclear-weapon-free status2 as a concrete step towards
promoting the aims of nuclear non-proliferation,
Bearing in mind the joint statement of the five nuclear-weapon States on
security assurances to Mongolia in connection with its nuclear-weapon-free status3
as a contribution to implementing resolution 53/77 D as well as their commitment to
Mongolia to cooperate in the implementation of the resolution, in accordance with
the principles of the Charter,
Noting that the joint statement has been transmitted to the Security Council by
the five nuclear-weapon States,
Mindful that at the Thirteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Kuala Lumpur, from 20 to 25 February 2003,4 the
heads of State or Government reiterated their support for Mongolia’s nuclear-
weapon-free status and considered that the institutionalization of that status would
be an important measure towards strengthening the non-proliferation regime in the
region,
Noting other measures taken to implement resolution 57/67 at the national and
international levels,
Welcoming Mongolia’s active and positive role in developing peaceful,
friendly and mutually beneficial relations with the States of the region and other
States,
__________________
1 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
2 See A/55/56-S/2000/160.
3 A/55/530-S/2000/1052, annex.
4 See A/57/759-S/2003/332, annex I.51
A/59/459
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on Mongolia’s
international security and nuclear-weapon-free status,5
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 57/67;5
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the efforts to
implement resolution 57/67, in particular the completion of the two studies on the
non-nuclear aspects of Mongolia’s international security;6
3. Endorses and supports Mongolia’s good-neighbourly and balanced
relationship with its neighbours as an important element of strengthening regional
peace, security and stability;
4. Welcomes the efforts made by Member States to cooperate with Mongolia
in implementing resolution 57/67, as well as the progress made in consolidating
Mongolia’s international security;
5. Invites Member States to continue to cooperate with Mongolia in taking
the necessary measures to consolidate and strengthen Mongolia’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, the inviolability of its borders, its independent
foreign policy, its economic security, and its ecological balance, as well as its
nuclear-weapon-free status;
6. Appeals to the Member States of the Asia and Pacific region to support
Mongolia’s efforts to join the relevant regional security and economic arrangements;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and relevant United Nations bodies to
continue to provide assistance to Mongolia in taking the necessary measures
mentioned in paragraph 5 above;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the
item entitled “Mongolia’s international security and nuclear-weapon-free status”.
__________________
5 A/59/364.
6 Ibid., sect. III.52
A/59/459
Draft resolution IX
Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and
collecting them
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/58 of 8 December 2003 on assistance to States for
curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and collecting them,
Considering that the illicit proliferation and circulation of and traffic in small
arms impede development, constitute a threat to populations and to national and
regional security and are a factor contributing to the destabilization of States,
Deeply disturbed by the magnitude of the illicit proliferation and circulation of
and traffic in small arms in the States of the Sahelo-Saharan subregion,
Noting with satisfaction the conclusions of the United Nations advisory missions
dispatched by the Secretary-General to the affected countries of the subregion to study the
most appropriate way of halting the illicit circulation of small arms and collecting them,
Welcoming the designation of the Department for Disarmament Affairs of the
Secretariat as a centre for the coordination of all activities of United Nations bodies
concerned with small arms,
Congratulating the Secretary-General for his report on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,1 and
bearing in mind the statement on small arms made by the President of the Security
Council on 24 September 1999,2
Welcoming the recommendations resulting from the meetings of the States of
the subregion held at Banjul, Algiers, Bamako, Yamoussoukro and Niamey to
establish close regional cooperation with a view to strengthening security,
Welcoming also the decision taken by the Economic Community of West
African States to renew the Declaration of a Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa,
adopted by the heads of State and Government of the Economic Community at
Abuja on 31 October 1998,3
Recalling the Algiers Declaration adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary
session, held at Algiers from 12 to 14 July 1999,4
Emphasizing the need to advance efforts towards wider cooperation and better
coordination in the struggle against the illicit proliferation of small arms through the
common understanding reached at the meeting on small arms held at Oslo on 13 and
14 July 19985 and the Brussels Call for Action adopted by the International
__________________
1 A/52/871-S/1998/318.
2 S/PRST/1999/28; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1999.
3 A/53/763-S/1998/1194, annex.
4 A/54/424, annex II, decision AHG/Decl. 1 (XXXV).
5 See CD/1556.53
A/59/459
Conference on Sustainable Disarmament for Sustainable Development, held at
Brussels on 12 and 13 October 1998,6
Bearing in mind the Bamako Declaration on an African Common Position on
the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, adopted at Bamako on 1 December 2000,7
Recalling the millennium report of the Secretary-General,8
Welcoming the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects,9 and calling for its expeditious implementation,
Recognizing the important role that the organizations of civil society play in
detection, prevention and raising public awareness, in efforts to curb the illicit
traffic in small arms,
Welcoming the convening of the Open-ended Working Group to Negotiate an
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, which held its first session
in New York from 14 to 25 June 2004,
1. Notes with satisfaction the Declaration of the Ministerial Conference on
Security, Stability, Development and Cooperation in Africa, held at Abuja on 8 and
9 May 2000,10 and encourages the Secretary-General to pursue his efforts in the
context of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 49/75 G of
15 December 1994 and the recommendations of the United Nations advisory
missions, aimed at curbing the illicit circulation of small arms and collecting such
arms in the affected States that so request, with the support of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and in close cooperation with
the African Union;
2. Encourages the international community to support the implementation
of the moratorium on the importation, exportation and manufacture of small arms
and light weapons in West Africa;3
3. Encourages the establishment in the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan
subregion of national commissions to combat the illicit proliferation of small arms,
and invites the international community to lend its support wherever possible to
ensure the smooth functioning of the commissions;
4. Also encourages the involvement of organizations and associations of
civil society in the efforts of the national commissions to combat the illicit traffic in
small arms and their participation in the implementation of the moratorium on the
__________________
6 A/53/681, annex.
7 A/CONF.192/PC/23, annex.
8 A/54/2000.
9 See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9-20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
10 A/55/286, annex II, decision AHG/Decl. 4 (XXXVI).54
A/59/459
importation, exportation and manufacture of small arms and light weapons in West
Africa as well as in the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects;9
5. Further encourages cooperation among State organs, international
organizations and civil society in combating the illicit traffic in small arms and
supporting operations to collect the said arms in the subregions;
6. Calls upon the international community to provide technical and
financial support to strengthen the capacity of civil organizations to take action to
combat the illicit trade in small arms;
7. Takes note of the conclusions of the meeting of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Economic Community of West African States, held at Bamako on 24
and 25 March 1999, on the modalities for the implementation of the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and Development, and welcomes the
adoption by the meeting of a plan of action;
8. Takes note also of the conclusions of the African Conference on the
Implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms: Needs
and Partnerships, held at Pretoria from 18 to 21 March 2002;
9. Invites the Secretary-General and those States and organizations that are
in a position to do so to provide assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in
small arms and collecting them;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consider the matter and to
report to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session on the implementation of the
present resolution;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and
collecting them”.55
A/59/459
Draft resolution X
Accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament
commitments
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/51 of 8 December 2003, and mindful of the
upcoming 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Expressing its grave concern at the danger to humanity posed by the
possibility that nuclear weapons could be used and at the lack of implementation of
binding obligations and agreed steps towards nuclear disarmament, and reaffirming
that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing
processes requiring urgent irreversible progress on both fronts,
Recalling the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to
accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear
disarmament, in accordance with commitments made under article VI of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,1 and noting that the ultimate
objective of the disarmament process is general and complete disarmament under
strict and effective international control,
1. Calls upon all States to comply fully with commitments made regarding
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation and not to act in any way that
may be detrimental to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation or that may lead to
a new nuclear arms race;
2. Also calls upon all States to spare no efforts to achieve universal
adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons1
and the early
entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;2
3. Calls upon all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons to accelerate the implementation of the practical steps for
systematic and progressive efforts to achieve nuclear disarmament that were agreed
upon at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;3
4. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to take further steps to reduce their
non-strategic nuclear arsenals and not to develop new types of nuclear weapons, in
accordance with their commitment to diminish the role of nuclear weapons in their
security policies;
5. Agrees urgently to strengthen efforts towards both nuclear disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation through the resumption in the Conference on
Disarmament of negotiations on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and
internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, in accordance with
the statement of the Special Coordinator in 19954 and the mandate contained
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
2 See resolution 50/245.
3 See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I.
4 See CD/1299.56
A/59/459
therein, taking into account both nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
objectives, as well as the completion and implementation of arrangements by all
nuclear-weapon States to place fissile material no longer required for military
purposes under international verification;
6. Calls for the establishment of an appropriate subsidiary body in the
Conference on Disarmament to deal with nuclear disarmament;
7. Underlines the imperative of the principles of irreversibility and
transparency for all nuclear disarmament measures and the need to develop further
adequate and efficient verification capabilities;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session an
item entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments”, and to review the
implementation of the present resolution at that session.57
A/59/459
Draft resolution XI
A path to the total elimination of nuclear weapons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 H of 15 December 1994, 50/70 C of
12 December 1995, 51/45 G of 10 December 1996, 52/38 K of 9 December 1997,
53/77 U of 4 December 1998, 54/54 D of 1 December 1999, 55/33 R of
20 November 2000, 56/24 N of 29 November 2001, 57/78 of 22 November 2002 and
58/59 of 8 December 2003,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international peace and security and the
promotion of nuclear disarmament mutually complement and strengthen each other,
Expressing deep concern regarding the growing dangers posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including that caused by proliferation
networks,
Welcoming the decision of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, announced on
19 December 2003, to renounce all its weapons of mass destruction programmes,
Welcoming also the adoption of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) of
28 April 2004 as an important step for global efforts to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction,
Convinced that every effort should be made to avoid nuclear war and nuclear
terrorism,
Reaffirming the crucial importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons1 as the cornerstone of the international regime for nuclear non-
proliferation and as an essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament,
Bearing in mind that challenges to the Treaty and to the nuclear non-
proliferation regime have further increased the necessity of full compliance and that
the Treaty can fulfil its role only if there is confidence in compliance by all States
parties,
Recognizing the progress made by the nuclear-weapon States in the reduction
of their nuclear weapons unilaterally or through their negotiations, including the
entry into force of the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions between the
Russian Federation and the United States of America,2 which should serve as a step
for further nuclear disarmament, and the efforts for nuclear disarmament and non-
proliferation by the international community,
Welcoming the ongoing efforts aimed at the reduction of nuclear-weapons-
related materials deployed within the framework of international cooperation, such
as the Cooperative Threat Reduction programme,
Reaffirming the conviction that further advancement in nuclear disarmament
will contribute to consolidating the international regime for nuclear non-
proliferation, ensuring international peace and security,
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
2 See CD/1674.58
A/59/459
Welcoming the continuation of a moratorium on nuclear-weapon-test
explosions or any other nuclear explosions since the last nuclear tests, in 1998,
Welcoming also the successful adoption of the Final Document of the 2000
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,3 and stressing the importance of implementing its conclusions,
Recognizing the active discussions at the third session, held from 26 April to
7 May 2004, of the Preparatory Committee for the 2005 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and emphasizing
the importance of a successful Review Conference in 2005, the year of the sixtieth
anniversary of the atomic bombings,
Welcoming the steady increase in the number of States that have signed and/or
concluded additional protocols to their International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards agreements in recent years, and sharing the hope that the Agency’s
safeguards system will be further strengthened through the universalization of
safeguards agreements and the additional protocols,
Encouraging the Russian Federation and the United States of America to
implement fully the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions and to continue their
intensive consultations in accordance with the Joint Declaration on the New
Strategic Relationship between the two States,2
Welcoming the Final Declaration of the third Conference on Facilitating the
Entry into Force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, convened in
Vienna from 3 to 5 September 20034 in accordance with article XIV of the Treaty,5
and the Joint Ministerial Statement of the second meeting of Friends of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in September 2004,
Encouraging all States to make maximum efforts to bring about the early entry
into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, progress on which would
contribute to a positive outcome of the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Recognizing the importance of preventing terrorists from acquiring or
developing nuclear weapons or related materials, radioactive materials, equipment
and technology, and underlining the role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in this regard,
Stressing the importance of education on disarmament and non-proliferation
for future generations and of efforts to tackle the current non-proliferation and
disarmament problems,
1. Reaffirms the importance of achieving the universality of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,1
and calls upon States not parties to the
Treaty to accede to it as non-nuclear-weapon States without delay and without
conditions;
2. Also reaffirms the importance for all States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to fulfil their obligations under the Treaty;
__________________
3 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
4 CTBT-Art.XIV/2003/5, annex I.
5 See resolution 50/245.59
A/59/459
3. Stresses the central importance of the following practical steps for the
systematic and progressive efforts to implement article VI of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and paragraphs 3 and 4 (c) of the decision on
principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament of the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty:6
(a) The importance and urgency of signatures and ratifications, without
delay and without conditions and in accordance with constitutional processes, to
achieve the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty5
as
well as a moratorium on nuclear-weapon-test explosions or any other nuclear
explosions pending the entry into force of that Treaty;
(b) The establishment of an ad hoc committee in the Conference on
Disarmament as early as possible during its 2005 session to negotiate a non-
discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices, in accordance with the report of the Special Coordinator of 19957
and the mandate contained therein, taking into consideration both nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation objectives, with a view to its conclusion within
five years and, pending its entry into force, a moratorium on the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons;
(c) The establishment of an appropriate subsidiary body with a mandate to
deal with nuclear disarmament in the Conference on Disarmament as early as
possible during its 2005 session in the context of establishing a programme of work;
(d) The inclusion of the principle of irreversibility to apply to nuclear
disarmament, nuclear and other related arms control and reduction measures;
(e) An unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States, as agreed at
the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals,
leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties to the Treaty are
committed under article VI of the Treaty;
(f) Deep reductions by the Russian Federation and the United States of
America in their strategic offensive arsenals, while placing great importance on the
existing multilateral treaties, with a view to maintaining and strengthening strategic
stability and international security;
(g) Steps by all the nuclear-weapon States leading to nuclear disarmament in
a way that promotes international stability, and based on the principle of
undiminished security for all:
(i) Further efforts by all the nuclear-weapon States to continue to reduce
their nuclear arsenals unilaterally;
(ii) Increased transparency by the nuclear-weapon States with regard to their
nuclear weapons capabilities and the implementation of agreements pursuant
__________________
6 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex,
decision 2.
7 CD/1299.60
A/59/459
to article VI of the Treaty and as voluntary confidence-building measures to
support further progress on nuclear disarmament;
(iii) The further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, based on
unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of the nuclear arms reduction and
disarmament process;
(iv) Concrete agreed measures to reduce further the operational status of
nuclear weapons systems;
(v) A diminishing role for nuclear weapons in security policies to minimize
the risk that these weapons will ever be used and to facilitate the process of
their total elimination;
(vi) The engagement, as soon as appropriate, of all the nuclear-weapon States
in the process leading to the total elimination of their nuclear weapons;
(h) Reaffirmation that the ultimate objective of the efforts of States in the
disarmament process is general and complete disarmament under effective
international control;
4. Recognizes that the realization of a world free of nuclear weapons will
require further steps, including deeper reductions in all types of nuclear weapons by
all the nuclear-weapon States in the process of working towards achieving their
elimination;
5. Invites the nuclear-weapon States to keep the Members of the United
Nations duly informed of the progress or efforts made towards nuclear disarmament;
6. Encourages all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons to make maximum efforts for a successful Review Conference in
2005;
7. Welcomes the ongoing efforts in the dismantlement of nuclear weapons,
notes the importance of the safe and effective management of the resultant fissile
materials, and calls for arrangements by all the nuclear-weapon States to place, as
soon as practicable, fissile material designated by each of them as no longer
required for military purposes under International Atomic Energy Agency or other
relevant international verification and arrangements for the disposition of such
material for peaceful purposes to ensure that such material remains permanently
outside of military programmes;
8. Stresses the importance of further development of the verification
capabilities, including International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards and
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty verification regimes, that will be required
to provide assurance of compliance with nuclear disarmament agreements for the
achievement and maintenance of a nuclear-weapon-free world;
9. Calls upon all States to redouble their efforts to prevent and curb the
proliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, confirming and
strengthening, if necessary, their policies not to transfer equipment, materials or
technology that could contribute to the proliferation of those weapons, while
ensuring that such policies are consistent with the obligations of States under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;61
A/59/459
10. Also calls upon all States to maintain the highest possible standards of
security, safe custody, effective control and physical protection of all materials that
could contribute to the proliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction in order, inter alia, to prevent those materials from falling into the hands
of terrorists;
11. Welcomes the adoption of resolution GC(48)/RES/14 on 24 September
2004 by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency,8 in
which it is recommended that States members of the Agency continue to consider
implementing the elements of the plan of action outlined in resolution
GC(44)/RES/19, adopted on 22 September 2000 by the General Conference of the
Agency,9 and in the Agency’s updated plan of action of February 2004, with the aim
of facilitating the entry into force of comprehensive safeguards agreements and
additional protocols, and calls for the early and full implementation of that
resolution;
12. Encourages all States to implement, as appropriate, the recommendations
in the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations study on disarmament
and non-proliferation education, submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-
seventh session,10 and voluntarily to share information on efforts they have been
undertaking to that end;
13. Encourages the constructive role played by civil society in promoting
nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament.
__________________
8 See International Atomic Energy Agency, Resolutions and Other Decisions of the General
Conference, Forty-eighth Regular Session, 20-24 September 2004 (GC(48)/RES/DEC (2004)).
9 Ibid., Forty-fourth Regular Session, 18-22 September 2000 (GC(44)/RES/DEC (2000)).
10 A/57/124.62
A/59/459
Draft resolution XII
Nuclear disarmament
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/75 E of 15 December 1994 on a step-by-step
reduction of the nuclear threat, and its resolutions 50/70 P of 12 December 1995,
51/45 O of 10 December 1996, 52/38 L of 9 December 1997, 53/77 X of
4 December 1998, 54/54 P of 1 December 1999, 55/33 T of 20 November 2000,
56/24 R of 29 November 2001, 57/79 of 22 November 2002 and 58/56 of
8 December 2003 on nuclear disarmament,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the
total elimination of nuclear weapons and the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
world,
Bearing in mind that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction of 19721 and the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction of 19932 have already established legal regimes on the complete
prohibition of biological and chemical weapons, respectively, and determined to
achieve a nuclear weapons convention on the prohibition of the development,
testing, production, stockpiling, loan, transfer, use and threat of use of nuclear
weapons and on their destruction, and to conclude such an international convention
at an early date,
Recognizing that there now exist conditions for the establishment of a world
free of nuclear weapons, and stressing the need to take concrete practical steps
towards achieving this goal,
Bearing in mind paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly,3 the first special session devoted to disarmament,
calling for the urgent negotiation of agreements for the cessation of the qualitative
improvement and development of nuclear-weapon systems, and for a comprehensive
and phased programme with agreed time frames, wherever feasible, for the
progressive and balanced reduction of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery,
leading to their ultimate and complete elimination at the earliest possible time,
Reaffirming the conviction of the States parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons4 that the Treaty is a cornerstone of nuclear non-
proliferation and nuclear disarmament and the importance of the decision on
strengthening the review process for the Treaty,5 the decision on principles and
objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament,5
the decision on the
extension of the Treaty5
and the resolution on the Middle East,5
adopted by the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
__________________
1 Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.
2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1974, No. 33757.
3 Resolution S-10/2.
4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
5 See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.63
A/59/459
Stressing the importance of the thirteen steps for the systematic and
progressive efforts to achieve the objective of nuclear disarmament leading to the
total elimination of nuclear weapons, as agreed to by the States parties in the Final
Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,6
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly and by the
international community,
Reiterating its call for an early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty,7
Stressing the importance of the forthcoming 2005 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the need for
a positive and substantive outcome of the Conference in a manner that will preserve
the integrity of the three pillars of the Treaty regime, that is, nuclear disarmament,
nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
Noting with appreciation the entry into force of the Treaty on the Reduction
and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (START I),8 to which Belarus,
Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, Ukraine and the United States of America are
States parties,
Noting with appreciation the entry into force of the Treaty on Strategic
Offensive Reductions (“the Moscow Treaty”) between the United States of America
and the Russian Federation9 as a significant step towards reducing their deployed
strategic nuclear weapons, while calling for further irreversible deep cuts in their
nuclear arsenals,
Noting with appreciation also the unilateral measures taken by the nuclear-
weapon States for nuclear arms limitation, and encouraging them to take further
such measures,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral
negotiations on nuclear disarmament, and that bilateral negotiations can never
replace multilateral negotiations in this respect,
Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the
General Assembly for the elaboration of an international convention to assure non-
nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, and the
multilateral efforts in the Conference on Disarmament to reach agreement on such
an international convention at an early date,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,10 and
__________________
6 See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled
“Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
7 See resolution 50/245.
8 The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 16: 1991 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.92.IX.1), appendix II.
9 See CD/1674.
10 A/51/218, annex; see also Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion,
I.C.J. Reports 1996, p. 226.64
A/59/459
welcoming the unanimous reaffirmation by all Judges of the Court that there exists
an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and
effective international control,
Mindful of paragraph 74 and other relevant recommendations in the Final
Document of the Thirteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-
Aligned Countries, held at Kuala Lumpur from 20 to 25 February 2003,11 calling
upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, as soon as possible and as the
highest priority, an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament and to commence
negotiations on a phased programme for the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons with a specified framework of time,
Recalling paragraph 61 of the Final Document of the Fourteenth Ministerial
Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Durban, South
Africa, from 17 to 19 August 2004,
Reaffirming the specific mandate conferred by the General Assembly in its
decision 52/492 of 8 September 1998 upon the Disarmament Commission to discuss
the subject of nuclear disarmament as one of its main substantive agenda items,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,12 in which heads of
State and Government resolve to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and to keep all options open for
achieving this aim, including the possibility of convening an international
conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, States
should refrain from the use or the threat of use of nuclear weapons in settling their
disputes in international relations,
Seized of the danger of the use of weapons of mass destruction, particularly
nuclear weapons, in terrorist acts and the urgent need for concerted international
efforts to control and overcome it,
1. Recognizes that, in view of recent political developments, the time is now
opportune for all the nuclear-weapon States to take effective disarmament measures
with a view to achieving the elimination of these weapons;
2. Reaffirms that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are
substantively interrelated and mutually reinforcing, that the two processes must go
hand in hand and that there is a genuine need for a systematic and progressive
process of nuclear disarmament;
3. Welcomes and encourages the efforts to establish new nuclear-weapon-
free zones in different parts of the world on the basis of agreements or arrangements
freely arrived at among the States of the regions concerned, which is an effective
measure for limiting the further spread of nuclear weapons geographically and
contributes to the cause of nuclear disarmament;
__________________
11 A/57/759-S/2003/332, annex I.
12 See resolution 55/2.65
A/59/459
4. Recognizes that there is a genuine need to diminish the role of nuclear
weapons in strategic doctrines and security policies to minimize the risk that these
weapons will ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total elimination;
5. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to stop immediately the qualitative
improvement, development, production and stockpiling of nuclear warheads and
their delivery systems;
6. Also urges the nuclear-weapon States, as an interim measure, to de-alert
and deactivate immediately their nuclear weapons and to take other concrete
measures to reduce further the operational status of their nuclear-weapon systems;
7. Reiterates its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to undertake the step-
by-step reduction of the nuclear threat and to carry out effective nuclear
disarmament measures with a view to achieving the total elimination of these
weapons;
8. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States, pending the achievement of the
total elimination of nuclear weapons, to agree on an internationally and legally
binding instrument on a joint undertaking not to be the first to use nuclear weapons,
and calls upon all States to conclude an internationally and legally binding
instrument on security assurances of non-use and non-threat of use of nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States;
9. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to commence plurilateral negotiations
among themselves at an appropriate stage on further deep reductions of nuclear
weapons as an effective measure of nuclear disarmament;
10. Underlines the importance of applying the principle of irreversibility to
the process of nuclear disarmament, nuclear and other related arms control and
reduction measures;
11. Underscores the importance of the unequivocal undertaking by the
nuclear-weapon States, in the Final Document of the Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held in New
York from 24 April to 19 May 2000, to accomplish the total elimination of their
nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties are
committed under article VI of the Treaty,13 and the reaffirmation by the States
parties that the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;14
12. Calls for the full and effective implementation of the thirteen steps for
nuclear disarmament contained in the Final Document of the 2000 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons;6
13. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to carry out further reductions of non-
strategic nuclear weapons, based on unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of
the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process;
__________________
13 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled
“Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15:6.
14 Ibid., section entitled “Article VII and the security of non-nuclear weapon States”, para. 2.66
A/59/459
14. Calls for the immediate commencement of negotiations in the
Conference on Disarmament on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and
internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices on the basis of the
report of the Special Coordinator15 and the mandate contained therein;
15. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to agree on a programme of work
which includes the immediate commencement of negotiations on such a treaty with
a view to their conclusion within five years;
16. Calls for the conclusion of an international legal instrument or
instruments on adequate security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States;
17. Also calls for the early entry into force and strict observance of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;7
18. Expresses its regret that the Conference on Disarmament was unable to
establish an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament at its 2004 session, as called
for in General Assembly resolution 58/56;
19. Reiterates its call upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, on a
priority basis, an ad hoc committee to deal with nuclear disarmament early in 2005
and to commence negotiations on a phased programme of nuclear disarmament
leading to the eventual total elimination of nuclear weapons;
20. Calls for the convening of an international conference on nuclear
disarmament in all its aspects at an early date to identify and deal with concrete
measures of nuclear disarmament;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Nuclear disarmament”.
__________________
15 CD/1299.67
A/59/459
Draft resolution XIII
Relationship between disarmament and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Charter of the United Nations envisages the establishment
and maintenance of international peace and security with the least diversion for
armaments of the world’s human and economic resources,
Recalling also the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly concerning the relationship between disarmament
and development,1 as well as the adoption on 11 September 1987 of the Final
Document of the International Conference on the Relationship between
Disarmament and Development,2
Recalling further its resolutions 49/75 J of 15 December 1994, 50/70 G of
12 December 1995, 51/45 D of 10 December 1996, 52/38 D of 9 December 1997,
53/77 K of 4 December 1998, 54/54 T of 1 December 1999, 55/33 L of 20 November
2000, 56/24 E of 29 November 2001 and 57/65 of 22 November 2002, and its
decision 58/520 of 8 December 2003,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Twelfth Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Durban, South Africa, from
29 August to 3 September 1998,3 and the Final Document of the Thirteenth
Ministerial Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Cartagena, Colombia, on 8 and 9 April 2000,4
Mindful of the changes in international relations that have taken place since
the adoption on 11 September 1987 of the Final Document of the International
Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, including
the development agenda that has emerged over the past decade,
Bearing in mind the new challenges for the international community in the
field of development, poverty eradication and the elimination of the diseases that
afflict humanity,
Stressing the importance of the symbiotic relationship between disarmament
and development and the important role of security in this connection, and
concerned at increasing global military expenditure, which could otherwise be spent
on development needs,
1. Welcomes the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the
relationship between disarmament and development5 and its reappraisal of this
significant issue in the current international context;
2. Stresses the central role of the United Nations in the disarmament-
development relationship, and requests the Secretary-General to strengthen further
the role of the Organization in this field, in particular the high-level Steering Group
on Disarmament and Development, in order to assure continued and effective
__________________
1 See resolution S-10/2.
2 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.IX.8.
3 A/53/667-S/1998/1071, annex I.
4 A/54/917-S/2000/580, annex.
5 See A/59/119.68
A/59/459
coordination and close cooperation between the relevant United Nations
departments, agencies and sub-agencies;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take action, through
appropriate organs and within available resources, for the implementation of the
action programme adopted at the 1987 International Conference on the Relationship
between Disarmament and Development;2
4. Urges the international community to devote part of the resources made
available by the implementation of disarmament and arms limitation agreements to
economic and social development, with a view to reducing the ever widening gap
between developed and developing countries;
5. Encourages the international community to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals and to make reference to the contribution that disarmament
could provide in meeting them when it reviews its progress towards this purpose in
2005, as well as to make greater efforts to integrate disarmament, humanitarian and
development activities;
6. Also encourages the relevant regional and subregional organizations and
institutions, non-governmental organizations and research institutes to incorporate
issues related to the relationship between disarmament and development in their
agendas and, in this regard, to take into account the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Relationship between disarmament and development”.69
A/59/459
Draft resolution XIV
Reducing nuclear danger
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat
to mankind and to the survival of civilization,
Reaffirming that any use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would constitute a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects would
seriously enhance the danger of nuclear war,
Convinced also that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of
nuclear weapons are essential to remove the danger of nuclear war,
Considering that, until nuclear weapons cease to exist, it is imperative on the
part of the nuclear-weapon States to adopt measures that assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering also that the hair-trigger alert of nuclear weapons carries
unacceptable risks of unintentional or accidental use of nuclear weapons, which
would have catastrophic consequences for all mankind,
Emphasizing the imperative need to adopt measures to avoid accidental,
unauthorized or unexplained incidents arising from computer anomaly or other
technical malfunctions,
Conscious that limited steps relating to detargeting have been taken by the
nuclear-weapon States and that further practical, realistic and mutually reinforcing
steps are necessary to contribute to the improvement in the international climate for
negotiations leading to the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Mindful that reduction of tensions brought about by a change in nuclear
doctrines would positively impact on international peace and security and improve
the conditions for the further reduction and the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly1 and by the
international community,
Recalling that in the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on
the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons2 it is stated that there exists an
obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and
effective international control,
Recalling also the call in the United Nations Millennium Declaration3 to seek
to eliminate the dangers posed by weapons of mass destruction and the resolve to
strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear
__________________
1 Resolution S-10/2.
2 A/51/218, annex; see also Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion,
I.C.J. Reports 1996, p. 226.
3 See resolution 55/2.70
A/59/459
weapons, including the possibility of convening an international conference to
identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers,
1. Calls for a review of nuclear doctrines and, in this context, immediate
and urgent steps to reduce the risks of unintentional and accidental use of nuclear
weapons;
2. Requests the five nuclear-weapon States to take measures towards the
implementation of paragraph 1 above;
3. Calls upon Member States to take the necessary measures to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects and to promote nuclear
disarmament, with the objective of eliminating nuclear weapons;
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 58/47 of 8 December 2003;4
5. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts and support initiatives
that would contribute towards the full implementation of the seven
recommendations identified in the report of the Advisory Board on Disarmament
Matters that would significantly reduce the risk of nuclear war,5 and also to continue
to encourage Member States to endeavour to create conditions that would allow the
emergence of an international consensus to hold an international conference as
proposed in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,3
to identify ways of
eliminating nuclear dangers, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Reducing nuclear danger”.
__________________
4 A/59/136.
5 See A/56/400, para. 3.71
A/59/459
Draft resolution XV
Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/48 of 8 December 2003,
Recognizing the determination of the international community to combat
terrorism, as evident in relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions,
Deeply concerned by the growing risk of linkages between terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction, and in particular by the fact that terrorists may seek to
acquire weapons of mass destruction,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) on the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, adopted on 28 April 2004,
Noting the support expressed in the Final Document of the Thirteenth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which was
held in Kuala Lumpur from 20 to 25 February 2003,1 and in the Final Document of
the Fourteenth Ministerial Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
which was held in Durban, South Africa, from 17 to 19 August 2004, for measures
to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction,
Noting also that the Group of Eight, the European Union, the Regional Forum
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and others have taken into account in
their deliberations the dangers posed by the acquisition by terrorists of weapons of
mass destruction, and the need for international cooperation in combating it,
Acknowledging the consideration of issues relating to terrorism and weapons
of mass destruction by the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters,2
Taking note of resolution GC(48)/RES/11, adopted on 24 September 2004 by
the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at its forty-
eighth regular session,3 and the setting up of an Advisory Group on Security in the
Agency to advise the Director General on the Agency’s activities relating to nuclear
security,
Taking note also of the report of the Policy Working Group on the United
Nations and Terrorism,4
Taking note further of the report of the Secretary-General, submitted pursuant
to paragraphs 2 and 4 of resolution 58/48,5
Mindful of the urgent need for addressing, within the United Nations
framework and through international cooperation, this threat to humanity,
__________________
1 A/57/759-S/2003/332, annex I.
2 See A/59/361.
3 See International Atomic Energy Agency, Resolutions and Other Decisions of the General
Conference, Forty-eighth Regular Session, 20-24 September 2004 (GC(48)/RES/DEC(2004)).
4 A/57/273-S/2002/875, annex.
5 A/59/156 and Add.1.72
A/59/459
Emphasizing that progress is urgently needed in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation in order to help to maintain international peace and security and to
contribute to global efforts against terrorism,
1. Calls upon all Member States to support international efforts to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery;
2. Urges all Member States to take and strengthen national measures, as
appropriate, to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and materials and technologies related to their manufacture, and
invites them to inform the Secretary-General, on a voluntary basis, of the measures
taken in this regard;
3. Encourages cooperation among and between Member States and relevant
regional and international organizations for strengthening national capacities in this
regard;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to compile a report on measures already
taken by international organizations on issues relating to the linkage between the
fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, to seek
the views of Member States on additional relevant measures for tackling the global
threat posed by the acquisition by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction, and to
report to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction”.73
A/59/459
Draft resolution XVI
The Conference on Disarmament decision (CD/1547) of 11 August
1998 to establish, under item 1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of
the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament”, an ad hoc
committee to negotiate, on the basis of the report of the Special
Coordinator (CD/1299) and the mandate contained therein, a
non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and
effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/75 L of 16 December 1993, 53/77 I of 4 December
1998, 55/33 Y of 20 November 2000, 56/24 J of 29 November 2001, 57/80 of
22 November 2002 and 58/57 of 8 December 2003,
Convinced that a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and
effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices would be a significant contribution to
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation,
Recalling the 1998 report of the Conference on Disarmament, in which, inter
alia, the Conference recorded that, in proceeding to take a decision on this matter,
that decision was without prejudice to any further decisions on the establishment of
further subsidiary bodies under agenda item 1 and that intensive consultations
would be pursued to seek the views of the members of the Conference on
Disarmament on appropriate methods and approaches for dealing with agenda item
1, taking into consideration all proposals and views in that respect,1
1. Recalls the decision of the Conference on Disarmament1
to establish,
under item 1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear
disarmament”, an ad hoc committee which shall negotiate, on the basis of the report
of the Special Coordinator2 and the mandate contained therein, a non-
discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices;
2. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to agree on a programme of work
that includes the immediate commencement of negotiations on such a treaty.
__________________
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/53/27),
para. 10.
2 CD/1299.74
A/59/459
Draft resolution XVII
Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/45 N of 10 December 1996, 52/38 G of
9 December 1997, 53/77 M of 4 December 1998, 54/54 H of 1 December 1999,
55/33 G of 20 November 2000, 56/24 P of 29 November 2001 and 57/81 of
22 November 2002 and its decision 58/519 of 8 December 2003, entitled
“Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament measures”,
Convinced that a comprehensive and integrated approach towards certain
practical disarmament measures often is a prerequisite to maintaining and
consolidating peace and security and thus provides a basis for effective post-conflict
peace-building; such measures include: collection and responsible disposal,
preferably through destruction, of weapons obtained through illicit trafficking or
illicit manufacture as well as of weapons and ammunition declared by competent
national authorities to be surplus to requirements, particularly with regard to small
arms and light weapons, unless another form of disposition or use has been
officially authorized and provided that such weapons have been duly marked and
registered; confidence-building measures; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants; demining; and conversion,
Noting with satisfaction that the international community is more than ever
aware of the importance of such practical disarmament measures, especially with
regard to the growing problems arising from the excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled spread of small arms and light weapons, which pose a threat to peace
and security and reduce the prospects for economic development in many regions,
particularly in post-conflict situations,
Stressing that further efforts are needed in order to develop and effectively
implement programmes of practical disarmament in affected areas as part of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration measures so as to complement, on a
case-by-case basis, peacekeeping and peace-building efforts,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
prevention of armed conflict,1 which, inter alia, refers to the role which the
proliferation and the illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons play in the
context of the build-up and sustaining of conflicts,
Taking note of the statement by the President of the Security Council of
31 August 20012 underlining the importance of practical disarmament measures in
the context of armed conflicts, and, with regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, emphasizing the importance of measures to contain the
security risks stemming from the use of illicit small arms and light weapons,
Also taking note of the report of the Secretary-General prepared with the
assistance of the Group of Governmental Experts on Small Arms3 and, in particular,
the recommendations contained therein, as an important contribution to the
consolidation of the peace process through practical disarmament measures,
__________________
1 A/55/985-S/2001/574 and Corr.1.
2 S/PRST/2001/21; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 January 2001-31 July 2002.
3 A/58/207.75
A/59/459
Welcoming the work of the Coordinating Action on Small Arms, which was
established by the Secretary-General to bring about a holistic and multidisciplinary
approach to this complex and multifaceted global problem and to cooperate with
non-governmental organizations in the implementation of practical disarmament
measures,
Welcoming also the report of the First Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New
York from 7 to 11 July 2003,4 as well as the convening of the open-ended working
group to negotiate an international instrument to enable States to identify and trace,
in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons.
1. Stresses the particular relevance of the “Guidelines on conventional arms
control/limitation and disarmament, with particular emphasis on consolidation of
peace in the context of General Assembly resolution 51/45 N”,5 adopted by the
Disarmament Commission by consensus at its 1999 substantive session;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the consolidation of
peace through practical disarmament measures, submitted pursuant to resolution
51/45 N,6 and once again encourages Member States as well as regional
arrangements and agencies to lend their support to the implementation of
recommendations contained therein;
3. Emphasizes the importance of including in United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping missions, as appropriate and with the consent of the host State,
practical disarmament measures aimed at addressing the problem of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in conjunction with disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes aimed at former combatants, with a view to
promoting an integrated comprehensive and effective weapons management strategy
that would contribute to a sustainable peace-building process;
4. Welcomes the activities undertaken by the Group of Interested States, and
invites the Group to continue to analyse lessons learned from previous disarmament
and peace-building projects, as well as to promote new practical disarmament
measures to consolidate peace, especially as undertaken or designed by affected
States themselves, regional and subregional organizations as well as United Nations
agencies;
5. Encourages Member States, including the Group of Interested States, to
lend their support to the Secretary-General, relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and non-governmental organizations in responding to requests by
Member States to collect and destroy small arms and light weapons in post-conflict
situations;
6. Welcomes the synergies within the multi-stakeholder process, including
Governments, the United Nations system, regional and subregional organizations
and institutions as well as non-governmental organizations in support of practical
disarmament measures and the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
__________________
4 A/CONF.192/BMS/2003/1.
5 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42), annex III.
6 A/52/289.76
A/59/459
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,7 in
particular, inter alia through the Coordinating Action on Small Arms;
7. Thanks the Secretary-General for his report on the implementation of
resolution 57/81,3
taking into consideration the activities of the Group of Interested
States in this regard;
8. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on disarmament and non-
proliferation education,8 as well as his report on the United Nations Disarmament
Information Programme;9
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session a report on the implementation of practical disarmament
measures, taking into consideration the activities of the Group of Interested States in
this regard;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the
item entitled “Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament measures”.
__________________
7 See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, New York, 9-20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
8 A/59/178 and Add.1.
9 A/59/171.77
A/59/459
Draft resolution XVIII
Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 K of 15 December 1994, 51/45 M of
10 December 1996, 52/38 O of 9 December 1997, 53/77 W of 4 December 1998,
54/54 Q of 1 December 1999, 55/33 X of 20 November 2000, 56/24 S of
29 November 2001, 57/85 of 22 November 2002 and 58/46 of 8 December 2003,
Convinced that the continuing existence of nuclear weapons poses a threat to
all humanity and that their use would have catastrophic consequences for all life on
Earth, and recognizing that the only defence against a nuclear catastrophe is the
total elimination of nuclear weapons and the certainty that they will never be
produced again,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the
total elimination of nuclear weapons and the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free
world,
Mindful of the solemn obligations of States parties, undertaken in article VI of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,1 particularly to pursue
negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear-
arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,2
Emphasizing the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to
accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear
disarmament, adopted at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,3
Recalling the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in its
resolution 50/245 of 10 September 1996, and expressing its satisfaction at the
increasing number of States that have signed and ratified the Treaty,
Recognizing with satisfaction that the Antarctic Treaty4 and the treaties of
Tlatelolco,5 Rarotonga,6 Bangkok7 and Pelindaba8 are gradually freeing the entire
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
2 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex,
decision 2.
3 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled
“Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15:6.
4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.
5 Ibid., vol. 634, No. 9068.
6 See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
7 Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone.
8 A/50/426, annex.78
A/59/459
southern hemisphere and adjacent areas covered by those treaties from nuclear
weapons,
Stressing the importance of strengthening all existing nuclear-related
disarmament and arms control and reduction measures,
Recognizing the need for a multilaterally negotiated and legally binding
instrument to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the threat or use of nuclear
weapons,
Reaffirming the central role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single
multilateral disarmament negotiating forum, and regretting the lack of progress in
disarmament negotiations, particularly nuclear disarmament, in the Conference
during its 2004 session,
Emphasizing the need for the Conference on Disarmament to commence
negotiations on a phased programme for the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons with a specified framework of time,
Expressing its deep concern at the lack of progress in the implementation of
the thirteen steps to implement article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,9
Desiring to achieve the objective of a legally binding prohibition of the
development, production, testing, deployment, stockpiling, threat or use of nuclear
weapons and their destruction under effective international control,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,10
Taking note of the relevant portions of the report of the Secretary-General
relating to the implementation of resolution 58/46,11
1. Underlines once again the unanimous conclusion of the International
Court of Justice that there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a
conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict
and effective international control;
2. Calls once again upon all States immediately to fulfil that obligation by
commencing multilateral negotiations leading to an early conclusion of a nuclear
weapons convention prohibiting the development, production, testing, deployment,
stockpiling, transfer, threat or use of nuclear weapons and providing for their
elimination;
3. Requests all States to inform the Secretary-General of the efforts and
measures they have taken on the implementation of the present resolution and
nuclear disarmament, and requests the Secretary-General to apprise the General
Assembly of that information at its sixtieth session;
__________________
9 See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled
“Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
10 A/51/218, annex; see also Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion,
I.C.J. Reports, 1996, p. 226.
11 A/59/136.79
A/59/459
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons”.80
A/59/459
Draft resolution XIX
Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and
on Their Destruction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/54 B of 1 December 1999, 55/33 V of
20 November 2000, 56/24 M of 29 November 2001, 57/74 of 22 November 2002
and 58/53 of 8 December 2003,
Reaffirming its determination to put an end to the suffering and casualties
caused by anti-personnel mines, which kill or maim hundreds of people every week,
mostly innocent and defenceless civilians and especially children, obstruct
economic development and reconstruction, inhibit the repatriation of refugees and
internally displaced persons and have other severe consequences for years after
emplacement,
Believing it necessary to do the utmost to contribute in an efficient and
coordinated manner to facing the challenge of removing anti-personnel mines placed
throughout the world and to assure their destruction,
Wishing to do the utmost in ensuring assistance for the care and rehabilitation,
including the social and economic reintegration, of mine victims,
Welcoming the entry into force, on 1 March 1999, of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction,1 and noting with satisfaction the work undertaken
to implement the Convention and the substantial progress made towards addressing
the global landmine problem,
Recalling the first to fifth meetings of the States parties to the Convention held
in Maputo (1999),2 Geneva (2000),3 Managua (2001),4 Geneva (2002)5 and
Bangkok (2003),6 and the reaffirmation of a commitment to the total elimination of
anti-personnel mines and to pursue, with renewed vigour, efforts to clear mined
areas, assist victims, destroy stockpiled anti-personnel mines and promote universal
adherence to the Convention,
Recalling also the preparatory process for the First Review Conference of the
Convention, to be held in Nairobi from 29 November to 3 December 2004, and the
two preparatory meetings held in Geneva on 13 February and on 28 and 29 June
2004 pursuant to the decisions of the Fifth Meeting of the States Parties,7
Welcoming the regional seminars that have been held in different parts of the
world during 2003 and 2004, which contributed to the exchange of information,
experiences and best practices in mine action as well as to preparations for the First
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2056, No. 35597.
2 See APLC/MSP.1/1999/1.
3 See APLC/MSP.2/2000/1.
4 See APLC/MSP.3/2001/1.
5 See APLC/MSP.4/2002/1.
6 See APLC/MSP.5/2003/5.
7 Ibid., part I, sect. E.81
A/59/459
Review Conference, and recalling the efforts to enhance cooperation in the regional
context and promote synergies between different regions,
Noting with interest the increased recognition of the need to integrate mine
action into international and national development programmes and strategies, and,
in this respect, welcoming the developments since the Fifth Meeting of the States
Parties, including the meeting between the President of the Fifth Meeting of the
States Parties and the President of the World Bank on 20 September 2004, which
contributed to possible partnership between the mine action community and the
World Bank,
Noting with satisfaction that additional States have ratified or acceded to the
Convention, bringing the total number of States that have formally accepted the
obligations of the Convention to one hundred and forty-three,
Emphasizing the desirability of attracting the adherence of all States to the
Convention, and determined to work strenuously towards the promotion of its
universalization,
Noting with regret that anti-personnel mines continue to be used in conflicts
around the world, causing human suffering and impeding post-conflict development,
1. Invites all States that have not signed the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on
Their Destruction1
to accede to it without delay;
2. Urges all States that have signed but not ratified the Convention to ratify
it without delay;
3. Stresses the importance of the full and effective implementation of and
compliance with the Convention;
4. Urges all States parties to provide the Secretary-General with complete
and timely information as required under article 7 of the Convention in order to
promote transparency and compliance with the Convention;
5. Invites all States that have not ratified the Convention or acceded to it to
provide, on a voluntary basis, information to make global mine action efforts more
effective;
6. Renews its call upon all States and other relevant parties to work together
to promote, support and advance the care, rehabilitation and social and economic
reintegration of mine victims, mine risk education programmes and the removal of
anti-personnel mines and stockpiles throughout the world and the assurance of their
destruction;
7. Invites and encourages all interested States, the United Nations, other
relevant international organizations or institutions, regional organizations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant non-governmental
organizations to attend the First Review Conference at the highest possible level
and, pending a decision to be taken at the First Review Conference, to maintain the
high level of participation in the subsequent meetings of the States parties, including
their intersessional work programme;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake the preparations necessary
to convene the next meeting of the States parties, pending a decision to be taken at82
A/59/459
the First Review Conference, and to invite States not parties to the Convention, as
well as the United Nations, other relevant international organizations or institutions,
regional organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant
non-governmental organizations to attend the meeting as observers;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction”.83
A/59/459
Draft resolution XX
Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/45 B of 10 December 1996, 52/38 N of 9 December
1997, 53/77 Q of 4 December 1998, 54/54 L of 1 December 1999, 55/33 I of
20 November 2000, 56/24 G of 29 November 2001, 57/73 of 22 November 2002 and
58/49 of 8 December 2003,
Recalling also the adoption by the Disarmament Commission at its 1999
substantive session of a text entitled “Establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region
concerned”,1
Determined to pursue the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
Determined also to continue to contribute to the prevention of the proliferation
of nuclear weapons in all its aspects and to the process of general and complete
disarmament under strict and effective international control, in particular in the field
of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, with a view to
strengthening international peace and security, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the provisions on nuclear-weapon-free zones of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,2 the first special session
devoted to disarmament,
Stressing the importance of the treaties of Tlatelolco,3 Rarotonga,4 Bangkok5
and Pelindaba6 establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, as well as the Antarctic
Treaty,7 to, inter alia, achieve a world entirely free of nuclear weapons,
Underlining the value of enhancing cooperation among the nuclear-weapon-
free-zone treaty members by means of mechanisms such as joint meetings of States
parties, signatories and observers to those treaties,
Welcoming the announcement of the organization of an international
conference of States parties signatories to the nuclear-weapon-free-zone treaties in
Mexico, in 2005, to support the common goals envisaged in those treaties,
Recalling the applicable principles and rules of international law relating to the
freedom of the high seas and the rights of passage through maritime space,
including those of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,8
__________________
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42),
annex I.
2 Resolution S-10/2.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
4 See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
5 Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone.
6 A/50/426, annex.
7 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.
8 See The Law of the Sea: Official Texts of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
of 10 December 1982 and of the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 with Index and Excerpts84
A/59/459
1. Welcomes the continued contribution that the Antarctic Treaty7
and the
treaties of Tlatelolco,3
Rarotonga,4
Bangkok5
and Pelindaba6
are making towards
freeing the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas covered by those treaties from
nuclear weapons;
2. Also welcomes the ratification by all original parties of the Treaty of
Rarotonga, and calls upon eligible States to adhere to the treaty and the protocols
thereto;
3. Further welcomes the efforts towards the completion of the ratification
process of the Treaty of Pelindaba, and calls upon the States of the region that have
not yet done so to sign and ratify the treaty, with the aim of its early entry into
force;
4. Calls upon all concerned States to continue to work together in order to
facilitate adherence to the protocols to nuclear-weapon-free-zone treaties by all
relevant States that have not yet done so;
5. Welcomes the steps taken to conclude further nuclear-weapon-free-zone
treaties on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region
concerned, and calls upon all States to consider all relevant proposals, including
those reflected in its resolutions on the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
in the Middle East and South Asia;
6. Affirms its conviction of the important role of nuclear-weapon-free zones
in strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime and in extending the areas of
the world that are nuclear-weapon-free, and, with particular reference to the
responsibilities of the nuclear-weapon States, calls upon all States to support the
process of nuclear disarmament and to work for the total elimination of all nuclear
weapons;
7. Calls upon the States parties and signatories to the treaties of Tlatelolco,
Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba, in order to pursue the common goals envisaged
in those treaties and to promote the nuclear-weapon-free status of the southern
hemisphere and adjacent areas, to explore and implement further ways and means of
cooperation among themselves and their treaty agencies;
8. Welcomes the vigorous efforts being made among States parties and
signatories to those treaties to promote their common objectives, and encourages the
competent authorities of the nuclear-weapon-free-zone treaties to provide assistance
to the States parties and signatories to those treaties so as to facilitate the
accomplishment of these goals;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas”.
__________________
from the Final Act of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.V.10).85
A/59/459
Draft resolution XXI
The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/24 V of 24 December 2001, 57/72 of 22 November
2002 and 58/241 of 23 December 2003,
Emphasizing the importance of early and full implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects,1
Welcoming the efforts by Member States to submit, on a voluntary basis,
national reports on their implementation of the Programme of Action,
Noting with satisfaction regional and subregional efforts being undertaken in
support of the implementation of the Programme of Action, and commending the
progress that has already been made in this regard,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 58/241,2
Welcoming the convening of the Open-ended Working Group to Negotiate an
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, which held its first two-
week substantive session in New York from 14 to 25 June 2004,
Welcoming also the broad-based consultations held by the Secretary-General
with all Member States, interested regional and subregional organizations,
international agencies and experts in the field on further steps to enhance
international cooperation in preventing, combating and eradicating illicit brokering
in small arms and light weapons, and noting the report of the Secretary-General in
this regard,2
1. Decides that the United Nations conference to review progress made in
the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects1
shall be held
in New York for a period of two weeks, from 26 June to 7 July 2006;
2. Also decides that the preparatory committee for the conference shall hold
a two-week session in New York from 9 to 20 January 2006, and reiterates that, if
necessary, a subsequent session of up to two weeks in duration may be held;
3. Further decides that the second biennial meeting of States, as stipulated
in the Programme of Action, to consider the national, regional and global
implementation of the Programme of Action shall be held in New York from 11 to
15 July 2005;
4. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts undertaken by the Chair of the
Open-ended Working Group to Negotiate an International Instrument to Enable
__________________
1 See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9-20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
2 A/59/181.86
A/59/459
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms
and Light Weapons, encourages the continued active participation of delegations in
the remaining sessions of the Open-ended Working Group, and stresses the
importance of making every effort to ensure that a positive outcome is achieved by
the Open-ended Working Group;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, while seeking the views of States, to
continue to hold broad-based consultations, within available financial resources,
with all Member States and interested regional and subregional organizations on
further steps to enhance international cooperation in preventing, combating and
eradicating illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons, with a view to
establishing, after the 2006 review conference and no later than 2007, and after the
conclusion of the work of the Open-ended Working Group, a group of governmental
experts, appointed by him on the basis of equitable geographical representation, to
consider further steps to enhance international cooperation in preventing, combating
and eradicating illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons, and requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session on the
outcome of his consultations;
6. Reaffirms the importance of ongoing efforts at the regional and
subregional levels in support of the implementation of the Programme of Action,
and invites all Member States that have not yet done so to examine the possibility of
developing and adopting regional and subregional measures, as appropriate, to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects;
7. Continues to encourage all initiatives to mobilize resources and expertise
to promote the implementation of the Programme of Action and to provide
assistance to States in its implementation;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to collate and circulate data
and information provided by States on a voluntary basis, including national reports,
on the implementation by those States of the Programme of Action, and encourages
Member States to submit such reports;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its sixtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution, including any
outcome of the work of the Open-ended Working Group;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects”.87
A/59/459
Draft resolution XXII
Confidence-building measures in the regional and
subregional context
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolution 58/43 of 8 December 2003,
Recalling also its resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003, entitled “Prevention of
armed conflict”, in which it called upon Member States to settle their disputes by
peaceful means, as set out in Chapter VI of the Charter, inter alia, by any procedures
adopted by the parties,
Recalling further the resolutions and guidelines adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly and the Disarmament Commission relating to confidence-
building measures and their implementation at the global, regional and subregional
levels,
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building measures
taken at the initiative and with the agreement of all States concerned and taking into
account the specific characteristics of each region, since such measures can
contribute to regional stability,
Convinced that resources released by disarmament, including regional
disarmament, can be devoted to economic and social development and to the
protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in particular those of the
developing countries,
Recognizing the need for meaningful dialogue among States concerned to avert
conflict,
Welcoming the peace processes already initiated by States concerned to resolve
their disputes through peaceful means bilaterally or through mediation, inter alia, by
third parties, regional organizations or the United Nations,
Recognizing that States in some regions have already taken steps towards
confidence-building measures at the bilateral, subregional and regional levels in the
political and military fields, including arms control and disarmament, and noting
that such confidence-building measures have improved peace and security in those
regions and contributed to progress in the socio-economic conditions of their
people,
Concerned that the continuation of disputes among States, particularly in the
absence of an effective mechanism to resolve them through peaceful means, may
contribute to the arms race and endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security and the efforts of the international community to promote arms control and
disarmament,
1. Calls upon Member States to refrain from the use or threat of use of
force, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations;88
A/59/459
2. Reaffirms its commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes under
Chapter VI of the Charter, in particular Article 33, which provides for a solution by
negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort
to regional agencies or arrangements or other peaceful means chosen by the parties;
3. Reaffirms the ways and means regarding confidence- and security-
building measures set out in the report of the Disarmament Commission on its 1993
session;1
4. Calls upon Member States to pursue those ways and means through
sustained consultations and dialogue, while at the same time avoiding actions which
may hinder or impair such a dialogue;
5. Urges States to comply strictly with all bilateral, regional and
international agreements, including arms control and disarmament agreements, to
which they are party;
6. Emphasizes that the objective of confidence-building measures should be
to help strengthen international peace and security and be consistent with the
principle of undiminished security at the lowest level of armament;
7. Encourages the promotion of bilateral and regional confidence-building
measures, with the consent and participation of the parties concerned, to avoid
conflict and prevent the unintended and accidental outbreak of hostilities;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its sixtieth session containing the views of Member States on
confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional
context”.
__________________
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42
(A/48/42), annex II, sect. III.A.89
A/59/459
Draft resolution XXIII
Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/75 J of 16 December 1993, 49/75 O of
15 December 1994, 50/70 L of 12 December 1995, 51/45 Q of 10 December 1996,
52/38 Q of 9 December 1997, 53/77 P of 4 December 1998, 54/54 M of 1 December
1999, 55/33 P of 20 November 2000, 56/24 I of 29 November 2001, 57/77 of
22 November 2002 and 58/39 of 8 December 2003,
Recognizing the crucial role of conventional arms control in promoting
regional and international peace and security,
Convinced that conventional arms control needs to be pursued primarily in the
regional and subregional contexts, since most threats to peace and security in the
post-cold-war era arise mainly among States located in the same region or
subregion,
Aware that the preservation of a balance in the defence capabilities of States at
the lowest level of armaments would contribute to peace and stability and should be
a prime objective of conventional arms control,
Desirous of promoting agreements to strengthen regional peace and security at
the lowest possible level of armaments and military forces,
Noting with particular interest the initiatives taken in this regard in different
regions of the world, in particular the commencement of consultations among a
number of Latin American countries and the proposals for conventional arms
control made in the context of South Asia, and recognizing, in the context of this
subject, the relevance and value of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in
Europe,1 which is a cornerstone of European security,
Believing that militarily significant States and States with larger military
capabilities have a special responsibility in promoting such agreements for regional
security,
Believing also that an important objective of conventional arms control in
regions of tension should be to prevent the possibility of military attack launched by
surprise and to avoid aggression,
1. Decides to give urgent consideration to the issues involved in
conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to consider the formulation of
principles that can serve as a framework for regional agreements on conventional
arms control, and looks forward to a report of the Conference on this subject;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in the meantime, to seek the views of
Member States on the subject and to submit a report to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels”.
__________________
1 CD/1064.90
A/59/459
Draft resolution XXIV
Regional disarmament
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/58 P of 4 December 1990, 46/36 I of 6 December
1991, 47/52 J of 9 December 1992, 48/75 I of 16 December 1993, 49/75 N of
15 December 1994, 50/70 K of 12 December 1995, 51/45 K of 10 December 1996,
52/38 P of 9 December 1997, 53/77 O of 4 December 1998, 54/54 N of 1 December
1999, 55/33 O of 20 November 2000, 56/24 H of 29 November 2001, 57/76 of
22 November 2002 and 58/38 of 8 December 2003 on regional disarmament,
Believing that the efforts of the international community to move towards the
ideal of general and complete disarmament are guided by the inherent human desire
for genuine peace and security, the elimination of the danger of war and the release
of economic, intellectual and other resources for peaceful pursuits,
Affirming the abiding commitment of all States to the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations in the conduct of their international
relations,
Noting that essential guidelines for progress towards general and complete
disarmament were adopted at the tenth special session of the General Assembly,1
Taking note of the guidelines and recommendations for regional approaches to
disarmament within the context of global security adopted by the Disarmament
Commission at its 1993 substantive session,2
Welcoming the prospects of genuine progress in the field of disarmament
engendered in recent years as a result of negotiations between the two super-Powers,
Taking note of the recent proposals for disarmament at the regional and
subregional levels,
Recognizing the importance of confidence-building measures for regional and
international peace and security,
Convinced that endeavours by countries to promote regional disarmament,
taking into account the specific characteristics of each region and in accordance
with the principle of undiminished security at the lowest level of armaments, would
enhance the security of all States and would thus contribute to international peace
and security by reducing the risk of regional conflicts,
1. Stresses that sustained efforts are needed, within the framework of the
Conference on Disarmament and under the umbrella of the United Nations, to make
progress on the entire range of disarmament issues;
2. Affirms that global and regional approaches to disarmament complement
each other and should therefore be pursued simultaneously to promote regional and
international peace and security;
__________________
1 Resolution S-10/2.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42),
annex II.91
A/59/459
3. Calls upon States to conclude agreements, wherever possible, for nuclear
non-proliferation, disarmament and confidence-building measures at the regional
and subregional levels;
4. Welcomes the initiatives towards disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation
and security undertaken by some countries at the regional and subregional levels;
5. Supports and encourages efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building
measures at the regional and subregional levels to ease regional tensions and to
further disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation measures at the regional and
subregional levels;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Regional disarmament”.92
A/59/459
Draft resolution XXV
Prevention of the illicit transfer and unauthorized access to and
use of man-portable air defence systems
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/42 and 58/54 of 8 December 2003 and 58/241 of
23 December 2003,
Recognizing that disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation are essential
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
Acknowledging the authorized trade in man-portable air defence systems
between Governments and the legitimate right of Governments to possess such
weapons in the interests of their national security,
Recognizing the threat posed to civil aviation, peacekeeping, crisis
management and security by the illicit transfer and unauthorized access to and use
of man-portable air defence systems,
Taking into account that man-portable air defence systems are easily carried,
concealed, fired and, in certain circumstances, obtained,
Recognizing that effective control over man-portable air defence systems
acquires special importance in the context of the intensified international fight
against global terrorism,
Convinced of the importance of effective national control of transfers of man-
portable air defence systems and the safe and effective management of stockpiles of
such weapons,
Welcoming the ongoing efforts of various international and regional forums to
enhance transport security and to strengthen management of man-portable air
defence systems stockpiles in order to prevent the illicit transfer and unauthorized
access to and use of such weapons,
Noting the importance of information exchange and transparency in the trade
in man-portable air defence systems to build confidence and security among States
and to prevent the illicit trade in and unauthorized access to such weapons,
1. Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects;1
2. Urges Member States to support current international, regional and
national efforts to combat and prevent the illicit transfer of man-portable air defence
systems and unauthorized access to and use of such weapons;
3. Stresses the importance of effective and comprehensive national controls
on the production, stockpiling, transfer and brokering of man-portable air defence
systems to prevent the illicit trade in and unauthorized access to and use of such
weapons;
__________________
1 See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9-20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.93
A/59/459
4. Encourages Member States to enact or improve legislation, regulations,
procedures and stockpile management practices to exercise effective control over
access to and transfer of man-portable air defence systems so as to prevent the illicit
transfer and unauthorized access to and use of such weapons;
5. Also encourages Member States to enact or improve legislation,
regulations and procedures to ban the transfer of man-portable air defence systems
to non-State end-users and to ensure that such weapons are exported only to
Governments or agents authorized by a Government;
6. Encourages initiatives to exchange information and to mobilize resources
and technical expertise to assist States, at their request, in enhancing national
controls and stockpile management practices to prevent unauthorized access to and
use and transfer of man-portable air defence systems and to destroy excess or
obsolete stockpiles of such weapons, as appropriate;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session an
item entitled “Prevention of the illicit transfer and unauthorized access to and use of
man-portable air defence systems”.94
A/59/459
Draft resolution XXVI
The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation
The General Assembly,
Concerned about the increasing regional and global security challenges
caused, inter alia, by the ongoing proliferation of ballistic missiles capable of
delivering weapons of mass destruction,
Bearing in mind the purposes and principles of the United Nations and its role
and responsibility in the field of international peace and security in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations,
Emphasizing the significance of regional and international efforts to prevent
and curb comprehensively the proliferation of ballistic missile systems capable of
delivering weapons of mass destruction, as a contribution to international peace and
security,
Convinced that the Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile
Proliferation1 will contribute to enhancing transparency and confidence among
States,
Confirming its commitment to the Declaration on International Cooperation in
the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for the Benefit and in the Interest of All
States, Taking into Particular Account the Needs of Developing Countries, as
contained in the annex to its resolution 51/122 of 13 December 1996,
Recognizing that States should not be excluded from utilizing the benefits of
space for peaceful purposes, but that in reaping such benefits and in conducting
related cooperation they must not contribute to the proliferation of ballistic missiles
capable of carrying weapons of mass destruction,
Mindful of the need to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery,
1. Welcomes the adoption of the Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic
Missile Proliferation on 25 November 2002 at The Hague1
as a practical step against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery;
2. Notes with satisfaction that one hundred and seventeen States already
have subscribed to the Code of Conduct;
3. Invites all States that have not yet subscribed to the Code of Conduct to
do so;
4. Encourages the exploration of further ways and means to deal effectively
with the problem of the proliferation of ballistic missiles capable of delivering
weapons of mass destruction;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session an
item entitled “The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation”.
__________________
1 A/57/724, enclosure.95
A/59/459
Draft resolution XXVII
Information on confidence-building measures in the field of
conventional arms
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Bearing in mind the contribution of confidence-building measures in the field
of conventional arms, adopted on the initiative and with the agreement of the States
concerned, to the improvement of the overall international peace and security
situation,
Convinced that the relationship between the development of confidence-
building measures in the field of conventional arms and the international security
environment can also be mutually reinforcing,
Considering the important role that confidence-building measures in the field
of conventional arms can also play in creating favourable conditions for progress in
the field of disarmament,
Recognizing that the exchange of information on confidence-building
measures in the field of conventional arms contributes to mutual understanding and
confidence among Member States,
1. Welcomes all confidence-building measures in the field of conventional
arms already undertaken by Member States as well as the information on such
measures voluntarily provided;
2. Encourages Member States to continue to adopt confidence-building
measures in the field of conventional arms and to provide information in that regard;
3. Also encourages Member States to engage in a dialogue on confidence-
building measures in the field of conventional arms;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to establish, with the financial support of
States in a position to do so, an electronic database containing information provided
by Member States and to assist them, at their request, in the organization of
seminars, courses and workshops aimed at enhancing the knowledge of new
developments in this field;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session an
item entitled “Information on confidence-building measures in the field of
conventional arms”.96
A/59/459
Draft resolution XXVIII
United Nations study on disarmament and non-proliferation
education
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/33 E of 20 November 2000 and 57/60 of
22 November 2002,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General on disarmament and non-
proliferation education,1 in which the Secretary-General reported on the
implementation of the recommendations contained in the United Nations study on
disarmament and non-proliferation education,2
Desirous of stressing the urgency of promoting concerted international efforts
at disarmament and non-proliferation, in particular in the field of nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation, with a view to strengthening international
security and enhancing sustainable economic and social development,
Conscious of the need to combat the negative effects of cultures of violence
and complacency in the face of current dangers in this field through long-term
programmes of education and training,
Remaining convinced that the need for disarmament and non-proliferation
education has never been greater, especially on the subject of weapons of mass
destruction, but also in the field of small arms and light weapons, terrorism and
other challenges to international security and the process of disarmament, as well as
on the relevance of implementing the recommendations contained in the United
Nations study,
Recognizing the importance of the role of civil society, including non-
governmental organizations, in the promotion of disarmament and non-proliferation
education,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Member States, the United Nations and
other international and regional organizations, civil society and non-governmental
organizations, which, within their purview, implemented the recommendations made
in the United Nations study,2
as discussed in the report of the Secretary-General
reviewing the implementation of the recommendations;1
2. Conveys once again those recommendations to Member States, the
United Nations and other international and regional organizations, civil society and
non-governmental organizations, and encourages them to report to the Secretary-
General on steps taken to implement them;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report reviewing the results
of the implementation of the recommendations and possible new opportunities for
promoting disarmament and non-proliferation education, and to submit it to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to utilize electronic means to the
fullest extent possible in the dissemination, in as many official languages as
__________________
1 A/59/178 and Add.1.
2 A/57/124.97
A/59/459
feasible, of information related to that report and any other information that the
Department for Disarmament Affairs gathers on an ongoing basis in regard to the
implementation of the recommendations of the United Nations study;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session an
item entitled “Disarmament and non-proliferation education”.98
A/59/459
Draft resolution XXIX
Bilateral strategic nuclear arms reductions and the new
strategic framework
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/68 of 22 November 2002,
Noting with satisfaction the new strategic relationship between the United
States of America and the Russian Federation, built on the principles of mutual
security, trust, openness, cooperation and predictability, as affirmed in their Joint
Declaration of 24 May 2002,1
Noting the increasing cooperation between the United States of America and
the Russian Federation in addressing significant challenges to international security,
as illustrated by their joint efforts regarding Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
of 28 April 2004,
Welcoming the determination of the two countries to work together, and with
other nations and international organizations, to meet their respective obligations
under article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons which
was opened for signature on 1 July 1968,2
Mindful of the obligation of all parties to the Treaty to abide by all of their
commitments under the Treaty,
1. Welcomes the entry into force of the Treaty on Strategic Offensive
Reductions (“the Moscow Treaty”) on 1 June 2003, under which the United States
of America and the Russian Federation are committed to reducing and limiting their
strategic nuclear warheads so that by 31 December 2012, the aggregate number of
such warheads does not exceed 1,700 to 2,200 for each party;
2. Supports the continued commitment of the United States of America and
the Russian Federation to cooperative efforts in strategic offensive reductions, inter
alia, through meetings of the Bilateral Implementation Commission for the Moscow
Treaty, as well as increased strategic stability through discussions in the working
groups established under the Consultative Group for Strategic Security;
3. Recognizes that the Moscow Treaty is an important result of the new
bilateral strategic relationship, which will help in establishing more favourable
conditions for actively promoting security and cooperation, and enhancing
international stability;
4. Acknowledges the contribution that the United States of America and the
Russian Federation have made to nuclear disarmament by reducing their deployed
strategic warheads by about half since the end of the cold war;
__________________
1 See CD/1674.
2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.99
A/59/459
5. Recognizes the importance of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation
of Strategic Offensive Arms (START),3 which is still in force, and of its provisions,
which will lay the foundation for ensuring confidence, transparency and
predictability in further strategic offensive reductions;
6. Also recognizes that, since the end of the cold war, the United States of
America has reduced the number of its START-accountable deployed strategic
warheads from over 10,000 to less than 6,000, and has also eliminated 1,032
launchers for intercontinental ballistic missiles and submarine-launched ballistic
missiles, 350 heavy bombers and 28 ballistic missile submarines, and removed 4
additional ballistic missile submarines from strategic service;
7. Further recognizes that, in the same time period, the Russian Federation
has reduced the number of its START-accountable deployed strategic warheads to
less than 5,000, and has also eliminated 1,250 launchers for intercontinental ballistic
missiles and submarine-launched ballistic missiles, 43 ballistic missile submarines
and 65 heavy bombers;
8. Recognizes the importance of the 1991 and 1992 initiatives put forward
by the Presidents of the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics/Russian Federation, which represent a major step forward in the meeting
by the Russian Federation and the United States of America of their obligations
under article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;2
9. Notes with approval that, since the end of the cold war, the United States
of America and the Russian Federation have halted the production of fissile material
for nuclear weapons and have committed themselves to eliminating excess fissile
material resulting from the dismantlement of weapons no longer needed for national
security;
10. Welcomes, in this context, the implementation of the 1993 Agreement
concerning the Disposition of Highly Enriched Uranium Extracted from Nuclear
Weapons,4 signed by the Governments of the Russian Federation and the United
States of America, under which more than 216 metric tons of excess Russian highly
enriched uranium have been down-blended for use as power reactor fuel, and the
fact that, under the Agreement, 30 metric tons of highly enriched uranium from
dismantled nuclear weapons will be down-blended per year until a total of 500
metric tons has been processed;
11. Also welcomes the independent action taken by the United States of
America to dispose of 174 metric tons of excess highly enriched uranium from its
nuclear weapons programme, of which 50 metric tons have already been down-
blended for use as reactor fuel;
12. Supports continued efforts by the United States of America and the
Russian Federation to implement the 1997 Agreement concerning Cooperation
regarding Plutonium Production Reactors5 and the 2000 Agreement concerning the
__________________
3 The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 16: 1991 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.92.IX.1), appendix II.
4 Available from www.armscontrol.ru/start/docs/heu93t.htm.
5 Available from www.nti.org/db/nisprofs/russia/fulltext/gcc/usruagre.htm.100
A/59/459
Management and Disposition of Plutonium Designated as No Longer Required for
Defense Purposes and Related Cooperation;6
13. Invites the United States of America and the Russian Federation to keep
other States Members of the United Nations duly informed of their nuclear reduction
activities;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Bilateral strategic nuclear arms reductions and the new strategic
framework”.
__________________
6 Available from www.nnsa.doe.gov/na-20/docs/2000_Agreement.pdf.101
A/59/459
Draft resolution XXX
Improving the effectiveness of the methods of work of the
First Committee
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/87 of 16 December 1993, 49/85 of 15 December
1994, 57/300 of 20 December 2002, 58/41 of 8 December 2003, 58/126 of
19 December 2003 and 58/316 of 1 July 2004,
Affirming that its rules of procedure permit the Main Committees to undertake
organizational refinements to improve the effectiveness of their methods of work,
and noting with satisfaction that the First Committee already has done so,
Emphasizing that improved functioning of the First Committee should be
considered in an integrated and comprehensive manner through the existing three
stages, namely general debate, thematic/structured debate, and consideration of and
action on draft resolutions,
Determining to continue its efforts to improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of the methods of work of the First Committee, as a means to enhance the role of the
General Assembly in promoting international peace and security,
1. Invites Member States to consider the biennialization or triennialization
of the agenda items discussed in the First Committee, on a voluntary basis, and
particularly when no specific action is required for the implementation of relevant
resolutions;
2. Also invites Member States to continue to hold interactive debates based
on a programme and format elaborated through informal consultations between the
Bureau and Member States in advance of each First Committee session;
3. Further invites Member States to submit draft resolutions in a more
concise, focused and action-oriented manner and, where practical, to consider the
possibility of submitting draft decisions;
4. Recommends that the respective sponsors of draft resolutions hold
informal consultations, both before and during First Committee meetings, with the
participation of all interested Member States for furthering discussions on draft
resolutions already submitted or yet to be submitted to the Committee;
5. Encourages Member States to introduce draft resolutions on related or
complementary issues to find commonalities in the language and purpose of those
draft resolutions, and invites Member States to consider pursuing mergers of such
texts through consultations with all sponsors;
6. Also encourages Member States, in particular those that present any draft
resolution, to follow up on the agreed resolution in order to contribute to the
achievement of the objective of such resolution;
7. Encourages the First Committee to introduce presentations of, and focus
discussions on, reports on the work of expert groups, the United Nations regional
centres for peace and disarmament, the United Nations Institute for Disarmament
Research and the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters initiated by the
Committee;102
A/59/459
8. Reiterates that the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 154 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, shall keep all Committees, including
the First Committee, informed of the detailed estimated cost of all resolutions and
decisions that have been recommended by the Committees for approval by the
Assembly;
9. Requests the First Committee, in the light of the growing
interconnectedness of issues before the General Assembly, to explore the forms of
mutual cooperation with other Main Committees;
10. Decides to develop further, within existing resources, the electronic
support for the work of the First Committee, in particular through the existing web
sites;
11. Decides also to review regularly the implementation of the present
resolution.103
A/59/459
91. The First Committee also recommends to the General Assembly the adoption
of the following draft decisions:
Draft decision I
Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia
The General Assembly, recalling its resolutions 52/38 S of 9 December 1997,
53/77 A of 4 December 1998, 55/33 W of 20 November 2000 and 57/69 of
22 November 2002 and its decisions 54/417 of 1 December 1999, 56/412 of
29 November 2001 and 58/518 of 8 December 2003, decides to include in the
provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the item entitled “Establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia”.
Draft decision II
United Nations conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear
dangers in the context of disarmament
The General Assembly decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “United Nations conference to identify ways of
eliminating nuclear dangers in the context of nuclear disarmament”.
Draft decision III
Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus
The General Assembly decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Problems arising from the accumulation of
conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus”.