United Nations A/63/430/Add.2
GeneralAssembly Distr.: General
4 December 2008
Original: Arabic
08-63473 (E) 161208
*0863473*
Sixty-third session
Agenda item 64 (b)
Promotion and protection of human rights: human
rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee*
Rapporteur: Mr. Khalid Alwafi (Saudi Arabia)
I. Introduction
1. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2008, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its sixty-third session, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human
rights”, the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms” and to allocate it to the Third Committee.
2. The Third Committee held a general discussion on the sub-item jointly with
sub-items 64 (c) and (e) at its 20th to 31st meetings, from 22 to 24 and from 27 to
30 October 2008, and took action on sub-item (b) at its 35th, 38th, 39th, 41st to 44th
and 46th to 48th meetings, on 4, 5, 11, 18, 20, 21, 24, 25 November 2008. An
account of the Committee’s consideration is contained in the relevant summary
records (A/C.3/63/SR.21-31, 35, 38, 39, 41 to 44 and 46 to 48).
3. For the documents before the Committee under this sub-item, see A/63/430.
4. At the 20th meeting, on 22 October, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights addressed the Committee and engaged in a dialogue with the
representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations
that are members of the European Union), Benin, Lebanon, Canada, China, Egypt,
Liechtenstein, Chile, the Sudan, Argentina, the Russian Federation, New Zealand,
Thailand, Australia, the United States of America, Colombia, Pakistan, the Syrian
* The report of the Committee on this item is being issued in six parts, under the symbol A/63/430
and Add.1-5.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 2
Arab Republic, Algeria, Switzerland, Malaysia, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Iran (Islamic Republic of) and Cuba (see
A/C.3/63/SR.20).
5. At the same meeting, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General made a
statement and engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Myanmar,
Indonesia, Liechtenstein and Thailand (see A/C.3/63/SR.20).
6. At the 21st meeting, on 22 October, the Special Rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief made a presentation and engaged in a dialogue with the
representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations
that are members of the European Union), the United States, Greece, Indonesia,
Canada, Israel, Denmark, the Netherlands, Lebanon and Iran (Islamic Republic of),
as well as with the observer for Palestine (see A/C.3/63/SR.21).
7. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection
of human rights while countering terrorism made a presentation and engaged in a
dialogue with the representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the European Union), Switzerland, the Gambia,
the United States, Denmark, Spain, Cuba, Mexico, Turkey, Algeria, Liechtenstein
and Pakistan (see A/C.3/63/SR.21).
8. Also at the 21st meeting, the Independent Expert on the question of human
rights and extreme poverty made a presentation and engaged in a dialogue with the
representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations
that are members of the European Union), Chile, Indonesia, Switzerland, Brazil,
Guatemala, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Cameroon and Peru (see
A/C.3/63/SR.21).
9. At the 22nd meeting, on 23 October, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Myanmar made a presentation and engaged in a dialogue with the
representatives of Myanmar, Argentina, Canada, the United Kingdom, New Zealand,
Japan, Australia, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that
are members of the European Union), the United States, the Czech Republic and
Thailand (see A/C.3/63/SR.22).
10. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea made a presentation and engaged in a
dialogue with the representatives of the United Kingdom, Canada, the Republic of
Korea, Japan, the United States, the Czech Republic, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and France (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the European Union) (see A/C.3/63/SR.22).
11. Also at its 22nd meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 made a presentation and
engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Israel, Lebanon, France (on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European
Union), Indonesia, South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Cuba and the Sudan, as
well as with the observer for Palestine (see A/C.3/63/SR.22).
12. At the 23rd meeting, on 23 October, the Special Rapporteur on torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment made a presentation and
engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of France (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), theA/63/430/Add.2
3 08-63473
United States, Uruguay, Thailand, Switzerland, Denmark, Norway, Nigeria,
Singapore and Mongolia (see A/C.3/63/SR.23).
13. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as a
component of the right to an adequate standard of living made a presentation and
engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Cuba, France (on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union),
Thailand, China and Brazil (see A/C.3/63/SR.23).
14. At the 24th meeting, on 24 October, the Special Rapporteur on violence
against women, its causes and consequences made a presentation and engaged in a
dialogue with the representatives of Chile, France (on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations that are members of the European Union), Lebanon, Canada,
Brazil, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Norway and Cameroon (see
A/C.3/63/SR.24).
15. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
defenders made a presentation and engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of
Ghana, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are
members of the European Union), Canada, the United States, Thailand, the Russian
Federation, Norway, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Myanmar and Iran (Islamic
Republic of), as well as with the observer for Palestine (see A/C.3/63/SR.24).
16. Also at the 24th meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the independence of
judges and lawyers made a presentation and engaged in a dialogue with the
representatives of the Maldives, Switzerland, Brazil, the United States, Argentina,
Iraq, the Sudan, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that
are members of the European Union), the Netherlands, Cuba, Fiji and Rwanda (see
A/C.3/63/SR.24).
17. At the 25th meeting, on 24 October, the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions made a presentation and engaged in a dialogue
with the representatives of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the European Union), Brazil, the United States,
Canada, Malaysia, Colombia, the Sudan, Iran (Islamic Republic of) and Guinea-
Bissau, as well as with the observer for Palestine (see A/C.3/63/SR.25).
18. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the right to education made a
presentation and engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of France (on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European
Union), Qatar, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Burundi and Nicaragua (see
A/C.3/63/SR.25).
19. At the 26th meeting, on 27 October, the Chairperson and Rapporteur of the
Working Group on the Right to Development made a presentation and engaged in a
dialogue with the representatives of Cuba, the Sudan, the United States and Brazil
(see A/C.3/63/SR.26).
20. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the right to food made a
presentation and engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Malaysia, France
(on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the
European Union), Cuba, China, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), the United
States, Switzerland, Brazil, the United Kingdom, Ireland and Belgium, as well as
with the observer for Palestine (see A/C.3/63/SR.26).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 4
21. Also at the 26th meeting, the Independent Expert on the effects of foreign debt
and other related international financial obligations of States on the full enjoyment
of human rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights made a
presentation and engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Cuba, the United
States, China and Kuwait (see A/C.3/63/SR.26).
22. At the 27th meeting, on 27 October, the representative of the Secretary-
General on the human rights of internally displaced persons made a presentation and
engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Switzerland, Canada, France,
Burundi, Azerbaijan, Kenya and Sri Lanka (see A/C.3/63/SR.27).
23. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health made a
presentation and engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Canada, the
United States, Brazil, France and New Zealand (see A/C.3/63/SR.27).
24. Also at the 27th meeting, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on human rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises made
a presentation and engaged in a dialogue with the representatives of Norway, the
United States, France and Canada (see A/C.3/63/SR.27).
II. Consideration of proposals
A. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1 and amendments thereto
contained in documents A/C.3/63/L.62 to L.68
25. At the 39th meeting, on 11 November, the representative of Angola, on behalf
of Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cape
Verde, Chile, Colombia, the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, the
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Mozambique, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay and Vanuatu, introduced a draft resolution (A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1)
entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”. Subsequently, the Dominican
Republic, Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, Palau, South Africa and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
26. At the 41st meeting, on 18 November, statements on the draft resolution were
made by the representatives of Chile, Uganda (on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations that are members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference),
Singapore, Jamaica, the Sudan, Egypt, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the Syrian Arab
Republic and China (see A/C.3/63/SR.41).A/63/430/Add.2
5 08-63473
Action on amendments to draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1 contained in
documents A/C.3/63/L.62 to L.68
27. Also at its 41st meeting, the Committee took the following action on proposed
amendments to draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1, which were submitted in
documents A/C.3/63/L.62 to L.68.
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.62
28. The representative of Egypt presented the amendment contained in
A/C.3/63/L.62, which was sponsored by Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Grenada,
Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, the
Sudan, Swaziland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, the
United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe. The amendment called for
a new preambular paragraph to be inserted before the first preambular paragraph,
reading:
“Guided by the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations, and recalling in particular, Article 2, paragraph 7, which
clearly stipulates that nothing in the Charter shall authorize the United Nations
to intervene in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of
any State,”
29. Statements were made by the representatives of Barbados, Singapore, China,
Malaysia, Timor-Leste, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, New Zealand,
Swaziland, Mexico, Costa Rica and Angola (see A/C.3/63/SR.41).
30. The Committee rejected the proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/63/L.62 by a recorded vote of 81 to 67, with 23 abstentions. The voting was
as follows:1
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia,2 Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
__________________
1 The delegation of Belize subsequently stated that, had it been present during the vote, it would
have voted in favour of the amendment.
2 The delegation of Namibia subsequently indicated that it had meant to vote against the
amendment, not in favour.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 6
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Benin, Cambodia, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana,
Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger,
Peru, Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Suriname,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Zambia.
31. After the vote, the representative of Colombia made a statement (see
A/C.3/63/SR.41).
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.63
32. The representative of Barbados presented the amendment contained in
A/C.3/63/L.63, which was sponsored by Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Botswana, China, the Comoros, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Grenada, Guyana, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Nigeria,
Oman, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, the Sudan, Swaziland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
33. The amendment called for the replacement, in the first preambular paragraph,
of the word “Reaffirming” by the word “Recalling”.
34. Statements were made by the representatives of Malaysia, Albania, Singapore,
Gabon and the United Kingdom (see A/C.3/63/SR.41).
35. The Committee rejected the proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/63/L.63 by a recorded vote of 87 to 60, with 22 abstentions. The voting was
as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia,
Myanmar, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands,A/63/430/Add.2
7 08-63473
Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Cambodia, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya,
Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Peru, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.64
36. The representative of Egypt presented the amendment contained in
A/C.3/63/L.64, which was sponsored by Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Botswana, China, Comoros, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Grenada, Guyana, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nigeria,
Oman, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, the Sudan, Swaziland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen and Zimbabwe. The amendment called
for the insertion, in the first preambular paragraph, of the phrase “and document
A/62/658” after the words “its resolution 62/149”.
37. Statements were made by the representatives of the Federated States of
Micronesia, Spain, Switzerland and Croatia (see A/C.3/63/SR.41).
38. The Committee rejected the proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/63/L.64 by a recorded vote of 87 to 57, with 22 abstentions. The voting was
as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada,
Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Oman,A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 8
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Cambodia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya,
Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Peru, Republic of
Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, United Republic of
Tanzania, Zambia.
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.65
39. The representative of Singapore presented the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/63/L.65, which was sponsored by Antigua and Barbuda, the
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Botswana, China, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Grenada, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nigeria,
Oman, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Singapore, the Sudan, Swaziland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda and Yemen. The amendment called for the replacement of the second
preambular paragraph with the following text:
“Noting the decisions taken by an increasing number of States to apply a
moratorium on executions, or to restrict the application of the death penalty to
the most serious crimes,”
40. Statements were made by the representatives of Italy, Malaysia, Egypt and
Montenegro (see A/C.3/63/SR.41).
41. The Committee rejected the proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/63/L.65 by a recorded vote of 86 to 59, with 24 abstentions. The voting was
as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros, Cuba,A/63/430/Add.2
9 08-63473
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Cambodia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya,
Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Peru, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.66
42. The representative of Botswana presented the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/63/L.66, which was sponsored by Antigua and Barbuda, the
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Grenada,
Guyana, Indonesia, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, the Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, the
United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and Yemen. The amendment called for the insertion
of a new paragraph before operative paragraph 1, which would read:
“Reaffirms the sovereign right of States to determine the legal measures
and penalties which are appropriate to their societies, in accordance with
international law.”
43. Statements were made by the representatives of Singapore, Barbados, Burundi,
France and Argentina (see A/C.3/63/SR.41).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 10
44. The Committee rejected the proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/63/L.66 by a recorded vote of 87 to 62, with 20 abstentions. The voting was
as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Congo, Djibouti, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi,
Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Peru, Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
South Africa, Suriname, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Zambia.
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.67
45. The representative of Barbados presented the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/63/L.67, which was sponsored by Antigua and Barbuda, the
Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Botswana, China, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Grenada, Guyana, Indonesia, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Oman, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Singapore, the Sudan, Swaziland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda and Yemen. The amendment called for the
replacement of operative paragraph 1 with the following text as a final preambular
paragraph:
“Noting the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 62/149”.A/63/430/Add.2
11 08-63473
46. Statements were made by the representatives of Australia, Egypt, Singapore
and Romania (see A/C.3/63/SR.41).
47. The Committee rejected the proposed amendment in document A/C.3/63/L.67
by a recorded vote of 88 to 59, with 20 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia,
Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of).
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia,
Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Peru, Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, Suriname, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.68
48. The representative of Singapore presented the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/63/L.68, which was sponsored by Antigua and Barbuda, the
Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Botswana, China, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Grenada, Indonesia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Myanmar, Nigeria, Oman, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Singapore, the Sudan, Swaziland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago
and Uganda. The amendment called for the replacement of operative paragraphs 2
and 3 with the following text:A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 12
“Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the present
resolution for consideration at its sixty-sixth session, based on the information
provided by Member States;”
49. Statements were made by the representatives of Barbados, Singapore, Norway,
Estonia and Uruguay (see A/C.3/63/SR.41).
50. The Committee rejected the proposed amendment in document A/C.3/63/L.68
by a recorded vote of 87 to 56, with 24 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia,
Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Cambodia, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Peru,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
Action on draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1
51. At the 42nd meeting, on 20 November, the representative of Barbados moved,
under rule 129 of the rules of procedure, for a separate vote on the first preambular
paragraph of draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1.
52. At the same meeting, the representative of Malaysia proposed an oral
amendment to operative paragraphs 2 and 3 of the draft resolution, whereby the
words “sixty-fifth session” would be changed to “sixty-sixth session”.A/63/430/Add.2
13 08-63473
53. The representative of Chile, on behalf of the sponsors, rejected the proposed
amendments, whereupon the Committee proceeded to vote separately on each
amendment as follows.
54. The Committee rejected the proposed amendment to operative paragraph 2 by
a recorded vote of 88 to 55, with 24 abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada,
Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Benin, Bhutan, Cambodia, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Guatemala,
Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Peru,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
55. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Singapore,
China, Germany, New Zealand, Egypt and the Czech Republic (see
A/C.3/63/SR.42).
56. Also at its 42nd meeting, the Committee rejected the proposed amendment to
operative paragraph 3 by a recorded vote of 90 to 53, with 23 abstentions. The
voting was as follows:A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 14
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kiribati, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Benin, Bhutan, Cambodia, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Guatemala,
Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Peru,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Suriname, United
Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
57. At the same meeting, the representative of Mexico, under rule 129 of the rules
of procedure, raised an objection to the earlier motion for division made by the
representative of Barbados, wherein he had called for a separate vote on the first
preambular paragraph.
58. Statements in favour of the motion for division were made by the
representatives of Antigua and Barbuda and Singapore and statements opposing the
motion were made by the representatives of Monaco and Armenia (see
A/C.3/63/SR.42).
59. The Committee voted on the motion for division, which was rejected by a
recorded vote of 88 to 53, with 24 abstentions. The voting was as follows:3
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Grenada,
__________________
3 The delegation of Uruguay subsequently stated that, had it been present during the voting, it
would have voted against the motion.A/63/430/Add.2
15 08-63473
Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Abstaining:
Benin, Bhutan, Cambodia, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Ghana,
Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco,
Niger, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
60. After the vote, statements were made by the representatives of the United
Kingdom and Uruguay (see A/C.3/63/SR.42).
61. At the same meeting, the representative of Singapore moved, under rule 129 of
the rules of procedure, that operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution be voted on
separately.
62. A procedural discussion followed, at the 42nd meeting, during which the
representatives of Singapore, Barbados, Mexico, Chile, France and New Zealand
made statements and the Secretary of the Committee spoke on a point of
clarification (see A/C.3/63/SR.42).
63. At the same meeting, the representative of Chile, under rule 129 of the rules of
procedure, raised an objection to the motion for division made by the representative
of Singapore.
64. Also at the same meeting, statements in favour of the motion were made by the
representatives of the Sudan and Barbados and statements opposing the motion were
made by the representatives of Monaco and Switzerland (see A/C.3/63/SR.42).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 16
65. The Committee voted on the motion for division, which was rejected by a
recorded vote of 88 to 55, with 24 abstentions. The voting was as follows:4
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Chad, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States
of America, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Benin, Bhutan, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea-
Bissau, Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco,
Niger, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
66. After the vote, the representative of Slovakia made a statement regarding the
vote.
67. Also at the 42nd meeting, the Committee proceeded to consider draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1 as a whole.
68. Statements were made by the representatives of Colombia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Malaysia, the Bahamas, Egypt, Croatia and the Sudan (see
A/C.3/63/SR.42).
69. The Committee adopted the draft resolution by a recorded vote of 105 to 48,
with 31 abstentions (see para. 182, draft resolution I). The voting was as follows:5
__________________
4 The delegation of Slovakia subsequently stated that, had it been present during the voting, it
would have voted against the motion.
5 The delegation of Djibouti subsequently stated that, had it been present during the voting, it
would have abstained.A/63/430/Add.2
17 08-63473
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-
Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Against:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Chad, China, Comoros, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda,
United States of America, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Belarus, Bhutan, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Cuba,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji, Ghana, Guinea, Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania,
Morocco, Niger, Oman, Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Suriname,
Togo, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia.
70. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Myanmar,
Guyana, Barbados, Thailand, Yemen, Papua New Guinea, India, Nigeria, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and the Syrian Arab Republic; after the vote,
statements were made by the representatives of the United States, Morocco,
Singapore, Lebanon, Egypt, Ghana, Japan, Bangladesh, Viet Nam, Bhutan, China,
Saudi Arabia, Swaziland, Benin and Botswana (see A/C.3/63/SR.42).
B. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.20
71. At the 35th meeting, on 4 November, the representative of Morocco, on behalf
of Benin, Brazil, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Egypt, Gabon Japan, Mali, Mauritius,
Morocco, Senegal and the United States, introduced a draft resolution entitled “The
role of the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights institutions in the
promotion and protection of human rights” (A/C.3/63/L.20). Subsequently, Angola,A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 18
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Brazil, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, the Gambia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malta, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Panama, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and the United
Kingdom joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
72. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.20 (see para. 182, draft resolution II).
73. After the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the
representative of France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that
are members of the European Union). A statement was also made by the
representative of Colombia regarding the sponsorship of the draft resolution (see
A/C.3/63/SR.38).
C. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.21
74. At the 35th meeting, on 4 November, the representative of Belgium on behalf
of, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Benin, Burundi, Costa
Rica, Cyprus, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Senegal, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Togo and the United Kingdom,
introduced draft resolution entitled “Regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights” (A/C.3/63/L.21).
75. Subsequently, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Canada, Chile, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, El Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Indonesia,
Israel, Japan, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Mali, Malta, Mongolia, Nigeria,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Republic of Moldova, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Republic of Tanzania and
Uruguay joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
76. At the 39th meeting, on 11 November, the representative of Belgium on behalf
of the sponsors orally revised the draft resolution as follows:
(a) Operative paragraph 6 (e), which read:
“(e) Recent initiatives by regional organizations, such as the Association
of the Southeast Asian Nations, to develop subregional arrangements for the
promotion and protection of human rights;”
was replaced by:
“(e) The recent decision by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) to develop a mechanism for the promotion and protection of human
rights;”A/63/430/Add.2
19 08-63473
(b) A new operative paragraph 6 (g) was inserted, to read:
“(g) Ongoing initiatives to further develop arrangements for the
promotion and protection of human rights by MERCOSUR;”
(c) In operative paragraph 6 (h), after the words “the Council of Europe,” the
words “and its various human rights bodies and mechanisms,” were inserted.
77. Also, at its 39th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.21, as orally revised (see para. 182, draft resolution III).
78. After the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the
representative of Cuba (see A/C.3/63/SR.39).
D. Draft resolutions A/C.3/63/L.22 and Rev.1
79. At the 39th meeting, on 11 November, the representative of Uganda, on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, Belarus and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Combating defamation of religions”
(A/C.3/63/L.22), which read as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Reaffirming the pledge made by all States, under the Charter of the
United Nations, to promote and encourage universal respect for and
observance of all human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion,
“Recalling the relevant international instruments on the elimination of
discrimination, in particular the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and Discrimination Based on Religion and Belief, the Declaration
on the Human Rights of Individuals Who are not Nationals of the Country in
which They Live and the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to
National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities,
“Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Commission on Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council in this regard,
“Welcoming the resolve expressed in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration adopted by the General Assembly on 8 September 2000 to take
measures to eliminate the increasing acts of racism and xenophobia in many
societies and to promote greater harmony and tolerance in all societies, and
looking forward to its effective implementation at all levels,
“Underlining in this regard the importance of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South
Africa, in 2001, welcoming the progress achieved in implementing the
Declaration and Programme of Action, and emphasizing that they constitute a
solid foundation for the elimination of all scourges and manifestations of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 20
“Expressing concern at the increase in racist violence and xenophobic
ideas in many parts of the world, in political circles, in the sphere of public
opinion and in society at large, as a result, inter alia, of the resurgence of
activities of political parties and associations established on the basis of racist
and xenophobic platforms and charters, and the persistent use of those
platforms and charters to promote or incite racist ideologies,
“Deeply alarmed at the rising trends towards discrimination based on
religion or belief, including in some national policies, laws and administrative
measures that stigmatize groups of people belonging to certain religions and
beliefs under a variety of pretexts relating to security and illegal immigration,
thereby legitimizing discrimination against them, and consequently impairing
their enjoyment of the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
and impeding their ability to observe, practise and manifest their religion
freely and without fear of coercion, violence or reprisal,
“Noting with deep concern the serious instances of intolerance,
discrimination and acts of violence based on religion or belief, intimidation
and coercion motivated by extremism, religious or otherwise, occurring in
many parts of the world, in addition to the negative projection of Islam in the
media and the introduction and enforcement of laws and administrative
measures that specifically discriminate against and target Muslims, in
particular Muslim minorities following the events of 11 September 2001, and
that threaten to impede their full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms,
“Stressing that defamation of religions is a serious affront to human
dignity leading to the restriction of the freedom of religion of their adherents
and incitement to religious hatred and violence,
“Stressing also the need to effectively combat defamation of all religions
and incitement to religious hatred, against Islam and Muslims in particular,
“Reaffirming that discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief
constitutes a violation of human rights and a disavowal of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations,
“Noting with concern that defamation of religions, and incitement to
religious hatred in general, could lead to social disharmony and violations of
human rights, and alarmed at the inaction of some States to combat this
burgeoning trend and the resulting discriminatory practices against adherents
of certain religions,
“Taking note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
submitted to the Human Rights Council at its fourth and sixth sessions, which
draw attention to the serious nature of the defamation of all religions, and
reiterating the call of the Special Rapporteur to all States to wage a systematic
campaign against incitement to racial and religious hatred by maintaining a
careful balance between the defence of secularism and respect for freedom of
religion and by acknowledging and respecting the complementarity of all the
freedoms embodied in the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,A/63/430/Add.2
21 08-63473
“Recalling the proclamation of the Global Agenda for Dialogue among
Civilizations, and inviting States, the organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, within existing resources, other international and regional
organizations and civil societies to contribute to the implementation of the
Programme of Action contained in the Global Agenda,
“Welcoming the efforts of the Alliance of Civilizations initiative in
promoting mutual respect and understanding among different cultures and
societies, as well as the forthcoming second forum of the Alliance, to be held
in Istanbul, Turkey, on 2 and 3 April 2009,
“Convinced that respect for cultural, ethnic, religious and linguistic
diversity, as well as dialogue among and within civilizations, is essential for
peace, understanding and friendship among individuals and people of the
different cultures and nations of the world, while manifestations of cultural
prejudice, intolerance and xenophobia towards people belonging to different
cultures, religions and beliefs generate hatred and violence among peoples and
nations throughout the world,
“Recognizing the valuable contributions of all religions and beliefs to
modern civilization and the contribution that dialogue among civilizations can
make to an improved awareness and understanding of common values,
“Underlining the important role of education in the promotion of
tolerance and the elimination of discrimination based on religion or belief,
“Reaffirming the need for all States to continue their national and
international efforts to enhance dialogue and broaden understanding among
civilizations, cultures, religions and beliefs, and emphasizing that States,
regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies and
the media have an important role to play in promoting tolerance, respect for
and freedom of religion and belief,
“Welcoming all international and regional initiatives aimed at promoting
cross-cultural and interfaith harmony, including the International Dialogue on
Interfaith Cooperation, held in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, on 6 and 7 December
2004, and the World Conference on Dialogue, held in Madrid from
16 to 18 July 2008, and their valuable efforts towards the promotion of a
culture of peace and dialogue at all levels, and taking note with appreciation of
the final declaration adopted at the conference on ‘Common world: progress
through diversity’, held in Astana on 17 October 2008,
“Underlining the importance of increasing contacts at all levels in order
to deepen dialogue and reinforce understanding among different cultures,
religions, beliefs and civilizations, and welcoming in this regard the
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the Ministerial Meeting on
Human Rights and Cultural Diversity of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in Tehran on 3 and 4 September 2007,
“Recalling its resolution 62/154 of 18 December 2007,
“1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General and the
conclusions contained therein;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 22
“2. Expresses deep concern at the negative stereotyping of religions
and manifestations of intolerance and discrimination in matters of religion or
belief still evident in the world;
“3. Strongly deplores all acts of ideological and physical violence and
assaults, and incitement thereto, against persons on the basis of their religion
or belief, and such acts directed against their businesses, properties, cultural
centres and places of worship, as well as targeting of holy sites and religious
symbols of all religions;
“4. Expresses deep concern at the programmes and agendas pursued by
extremist organizations and groups aimed at the defamation of religions, and
incitement to religious hatred in general, in particular when condoned by
Governments;
“5. Notes with deep concern the intensification of the campaign of
defamation of religions, and incitement to religious hatred in general,
including the ethnic and religious profiling of Muslim minorities in the
aftermath of the tragic events of 11 September 2001;
“6. Recognizes that, in the context of the fight against terrorism and the
reaction to counter-terrorism measures, defamation of religions, and incitement
to religious hatred in general, become aggravating factors that contribute to the
denial of fundamental rights and freedoms of members of target groups, as
well as their economic and social exclusion;
“7. Expresses deep concern in this respect that Islam is frequently and
wrongly associated with human rights violations and terrorism;
“8. Reiterates the commitment of all States to the implementation, in an
integrated manner, of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which was adopted without a vote by the General Assembly on 8 September
2006, and which clearly affirms, inter alia, that terrorism cannot and should
not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
stressing the need to reinforce the international community’s commitment to
promote a culture of peace, justice and human development, ethnic, national
and religious tolerance, and respect for all religions, religious values, beliefs
or cultures and prevent the defamation of religions;
“9. Deplores the use of the print, audio-visual and electronic media,
including the Internet, and any other means to incite acts of violence,
xenophobia or related intolerance and discrimination against any religion,
including Islam, as well as targeting of religious symbols;
“10. Emphasizes that, as stipulated in international human rights law,
everyone has the right to hold opinions without interference and the right to
freedom of expression, and that the exercise of these rights carries with it
special duties and responsibilities and may therefore be subject to limitations
as are provided for by law and are necessary for respect of the rights or
reputations of others, protection of national security or of public order, public
health or morals;
“11. Reaffirms that general recommendation XV (42) of the Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, in which the Committee
stipulated that the prohibition of the dissemination of all ideas based uponA/63/430/Add.2
23 08-63473
racial superiority or hatred is compatible with freedom of opinion and
expression, is equally applicable to the question of incitement to religious
hatred;
“12. Invites the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression to continue to carry out their work as mandated by the Human
Rights Council in its resolutions 7/34 and 7/36 of 28 March 2008;
“13. Reaffirms the obligation of all States to enact the necessary
legislation to prohibit the advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, and urges States
to take resolute action in this regard;
“14. Urges all States to provide, within their respective legal and
constitutional systems, adequate protection against acts of hatred,
discrimination, intimidation and coercion resulting from defamation of
religions and incitement to religious hatred in general, to take all possible
measures to promote tolerance and respect for all religions and beliefs and the
understanding of their value systems and to complement legal systems with
intellectual and moral strategies to combat religious hatred and intolerance;
“15. Also urges all States to ensure that all public officials, including
members of law enforcement bodies, the military, civil servants and educators,
in the course of their official duties, respect people regardless of their different
religions and beliefs and do not discriminate against persons on the grounds of
their religion or belief, and that any necessary and appropriate education or
training is provided;
“16. Underscores the need to combat defamation of religions, and
incitement to religious hatred in general, by strategizing and harmonizing
actions at the local, national, regional and international levels through
education and awareness-raising;
“17. Urges States to ensure equal access to education for all, in law and
in practice, including access to free primary education for all children, both
girls and boys, and access for adults to lifelong learning and education based
on respect for human rights, diversity and tolerance, without discrimination of
any kind, and to refrain from any legal or other measures leading to racial
segregation in access to schooling;
“18. Calls upon the international community to foster a global dialogue
to promote a culture of tolerance and peace based on respect for human rights
and diversity of religion and belief, and urges States, non-governmental
organizations, religious bodies and the print and electronic media to support
and participate in such a dialogue;
“19. Affirms that the Human Rights Council shall promote universal
respect for all religious and cultural values and address instances of
intolerance, discrimination and incitement of hatred against members of any
community or adherents of any religion, as well as promote ways to
consolidate international efforts in order to combat impunity for such
deplorable acts;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 24
“20. Welcomes the initiative by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to hold an expert seminar on freedom of expression and
advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination,
hostility and violence, which was held on 2 and 3 October 2008, and requests
the High Commissioner to continue to build on this initiative, with a view to
preventing and eliminating all such forms of incitement and the consequences
of negative stereotyping of religions or beliefs, and their adherents, on the
human rights of those individuals and their communities;
“21. Takes note of the efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to promote and include human rights aspects in educational
programmes, particularly the World Programme for Human Rights Education
proclaimed by the General Assembly on 10 December 2004, and calls upon the
High Commissioner to continue those efforts, with particular focus on:
“(a) The contributions of cultures, as well as religious and cultural
diversity;
“(b) Collaboration with other relevant bodies of the United Nations
system and regional and international organizations in holding joint
conferences designed to encourage the dialogue among civilizations and
promote understanding of the universality of human rights and their
implementation at various levels, in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Representative for the Alliance of Civilizations and the unit within the
Secretariat mandated to interact with various entities within the United Nations
system and coordinate their contribution to the intergovernmental process;
“22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the
implementation of the present resolution, including on the possible correlation
between defamation of religions and the upsurge in incitement, intolerance and
hatred in many parts of the world, to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session.”
80. At its 46th meeting, on 24 November, the Committee had before it a revised
text of the draft resolution (A/C.3/63/L.22/Rev.1), which the representative of
Uganda orally revised by replacing, in the eighth preambular paragraph, the words
“illegal immigration” by the words “irregular immigration”.
81. At the same meeting, statements were made by the representative of Egypt and
the observer for the Holy See (see A/C.3/63/SR.46).
82. Also at its 46th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.22/Rev.1, as orally revised, by a recorded vote of 85 to 50, with 42 abstentions
(see para. 182, draft resolution IV). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,A/63/430/Add.2
25 08-63473
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti,
India, Japan, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico, Mongolia, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Rwanda, Timor-
Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Zambia.
83. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of India, the
United States and France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations
that are members of the European Union and associated States); after the vote,
statements were made by the representatives of Nigeria, Chile, Colombia, Brazil and
Singapore (see A/C.3/63/SR.46).
E. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.23
84. At the 35th meeting, on 4 November, the representative of Germany, on behalf
of Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Mongolia, the
Netherlands, Norway, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain, introduced a draft
resolution entitled “National institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights” (A/C.3/63/L.23).
85. Subsequently, Albania, Andorra, Bangladesh, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Dominican Republic, Estonia,
Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lithuania, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco, Nigeria, Panama, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, the
Russian Federation, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, theA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 26
United Kingdom, the United Republic of Tanzania and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
86. At the 43rd meeting on 20 November, the representative of Germany, on
behalf of the sponsors, orally revised the draft resolution as follows:
(a) Footnote 7, which read “A/62/287”, was replaced by A/63/486;
(b) In operative paragraph 10, the words “in the international human rights
system, especially” were deleted;
(c) In operative paragraph 12, the words “as well as with the World Bank,
other” were deleted;
(d) Operative paragraph 24, which read:
“24. Encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms as well as
agencies, funds and programmes to work in close cooperation with national
institutions in the promotion and protection of human rights with respect to,
inter alia, projects in the area of good governance and rule of law, and in this
regard welcomes joint efforts made by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations Development
Programme to develop partnerships in support of national institutions;”
was replaced by:
“24. Encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms as well as
agencies, funds and programmes to work within their respective mandates with
Member States and national institutions in the promotion and protection of
human rights with respect to, inter alia, projects in the area of good
governance and rule of law, and in this regard welcomes the efforts made by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
develop partnerships in support of national institutions;”
87. Also, at the 43rd meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.23, as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 182, draft resolution V).
F. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.24
88. At the 35th meeting, on 4 November, the representative of Benin introduced a
draft resolution, on behalf of the Group of African States, as well as Argentina
Austria, Bulgaria, Colombia, El Salvador, France, Hungary, Ireland, Kenya, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and Slovenia entitled “International Year of Human
Rights Learning” (A/C.3/63/L.24).
89. Subsequently, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Ecuador, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Oman, Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Spain, Suriname, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and the United States, joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
90. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the representative of Benin orally revised
the draft resolution as follows:A/63/430/Add.2
27 08-63473
(a) In the second preambular paragraph, first line, the words “and
reiterating” were replaced by the words “which decided”;
(b) In the ninth preambular paragraph, first line, the words “where
appropriate” were inserted after the words “private sector”;
(c) Operative paragraph 2, which read:
“2. Urges Member States to develop throughout the International Year
of Human Rights Learning and beyond, in coordination with civil society, the
private sector, academia and parliamentarians and regional organizations,
including the appropriate specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations system, international strategies and/or regional, national and
local plans of action aimed at broad-based and sustained human rights learning
at all levels, without losing sight, where appropriate, of the work of the World
Programme for Human Rights Education;”
was replaced by:
“2. Urges Member States to develop throughout the International Year
of Human Rights Learning and beyond, in coordination with civil society, the
private sector, academia and parliamentarians and regional organizations,
including the appropriate specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations system, international strategies and/or regional, national and
local programmes of action aimed at broad-based and sustained human rights
learning at all levels, bearing in mind the complimentary efforts undertaken
within the framework of the World Programme for Human Rights Education;”
(d) In operative paragraph 3, the word “plans” was replaced by the word
“programmes”.
91. Also, at the 43rd meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.24, as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 182, draft resolution VI).
G. Draft resolutions A/C.3/63/L.25 and Rev.1
92. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the representative of Austria, on behalf
of Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway,
Panama, Peru, Poland, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, the
Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, the United
Kingdom and Uruguay, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Effective promotion
of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities” (A/C.3/63/L.25). Subsequently, Italy and San
Marino joined in sponsoring the draft resolution, which read as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Recalling the relevant provisions of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992 on theA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 28
Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities,
“Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the effective promotion of
the Declaration, as well as Human Rights Council resolutions 6/15 of
28 September 2007, by which the Council established the Forum on Minority
Issues, and 7/6 of 27 March 2008 on the mandate of the independent expert on
minority issues,
“Noting that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities contributes
to political and social stability and peace and enriches the cultural diversity
and heritage of society, as reaffirmed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome,
“Affirming that effective measures and the creation of favourable
conditions for the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging
to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, ensuring effective
non-discrimination and equality for all, as well as full and effective
participation in matters affecting them, contribute to the prevention and
peaceful solution of human rights problems and situations involving
minorities,
“Expressing concern at the frequency and severity of disputes and
conflicts involving minorities in many countries and their often tragic
consequences, and that persons belonging to minorities often suffer
disproportionately from the effects of conflict resulting in the violation of their
human rights and are particularly vulnerable to displacement through, inter
alia, population transfers, refugee flows and forced relocation,
“Emphasizing the need for reinforced efforts to meet the goal of the full
realization of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities,
“Emphasizing also the importance of human rights education, training
and learning as well as of dialogue and interaction among all relevant
stakeholders and members of society on the promotion and protection of the
rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities as an integral part of the development of society as a whole,
including the sharing of best practices such as for the promotion of mutual
understanding of minority issues, managing diversity by recognizing plural
identities and promoting inclusive and stable societies as well as social
cohesion therein,
“Emphasizing further the important role that national institutions can
play in the promotion and protection of rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities as well as in early warning and
awareness-raising for problems regarding minority situations,
“Acknowledging that the United Nations has an important role to play
regarding the protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities by, inter alia, taking due account of
and giving effect to the Declaration,
“1. Reaffirms the obligation of States to ensure that persons belonging
to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities may exercise fully andA/63/430/Add.2
29 08-63473
effectively all human rights and fundamental freedoms without any
discrimination and in full equality before the law, as proclaimed in the
Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities, and draws attention to the relevant
provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, including the
provisions on forms of multiple discrimination;
“2. Urges States and the international community to promote and
protect the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities, as set out in the Declaration, including through the
encouragement of conditions for the promotion of their identity, the provision
of adequate education and the facilitation of their participation in all aspects of
the political, economic, social, religious and cultural life of society and in the
economic progress and development of their country, without discrimination,
and to apply a gender perspective while doing so;
“3. Urges States to take, as appropriate, all necessary constitutional,
legislative, administrative and other measures to promote and give effect to the
Declaration, and appeals to States to cooperate bilaterally and multilaterally, in
particular on the exchange of best practices and lessons learned, in accordance
with the Declaration, in order to promote and protect the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
“4. Welcomes, in this regard, the initiative of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to organize, in cooperation
with the International Labour Organization and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the expert meeting on integration with diversity in policing,
held in Vienna on 15 and 16 January 2008 bringing together police service
professionals from different regions and countries of the world in order to
share experiences and lessons learned in relation to the inclusion of persons
belonging to minorities in law enforcement systems, and takes note of the
elaboration by the Office of the High Commissioner of guidelines on
integration with diversity in policing;
“5. Commends the independent expert on minority issues for the work
that she has undertaken so far, for the important role that she has played in
raising the level of awareness of and in giving added visibility to the rights of
persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and
for her ongoing efforts to promote and protect their rights in order to ensure
equitable development and peaceful and stable societies, including through
close cooperation with Governments, the relevant United Nations bodies and
mechanisms and non-governmental organizations;
“6. Calls upon all States to cooperate with the independent expert in
the performance of the tasks and duties mandated to her, and encourages the
specialized agencies, regional organizations, national human rights institutions
and non-governmental organizations to develop regular dialogue and
cooperation with the mandate-holder;
“7. Welcomes the decision of the Human Rights Council to establish the
Forum on Minority Issues, providing a platform for promoting dialogue and
cooperation on issues pertaining to persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities, which will provide thematic contributionsA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 30
and expertise to the work of the independent expert on minority issues and
identify and analyse best practices, challenges, opportunities and initiatives for
the further implementation of the Declaration;
“8. Encourages States, United Nations mechanisms, bodies and
specialized agencies, funds and programmes, regional, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and national human rights institutions as well
as academics and experts on minority issues to participate actively in the
inaugural session of the Forum on Minority Issues, to be held on 15 and
16 December 2008 in Geneva, which is dedicated to the subject of rights of
persons belonging to minorities and the right to education;
“9. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to promote, within her mandate, the implementation of the Declaration,
to continue to engage in a dialogue with Governments for that purpose and to
regularly update and disseminate widely the United Nations Guide for
Minorities;
“10. Welcomes the inter-agency consultation of the High Commissioner
with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes on minority issues, and
calls upon those agencies, funds and programmes to contribute actively to this
process;
“11. Also welcomes the cooperation of the independent expert on
minority issues with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, such as
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, in continuing their engagement with persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in their work in all parts
of the world, and in this regard takes note of the ongoing work of the United
Nations Development Programme on its guidance and policy note on minority
issues;
“12. Requests the High Commissioner to continue her efforts to improve
the coordination and cooperation among United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes on activities related to the promotion and protection of the rights
of persons belonging to minorities and to take the work of relevant regional
organizations active in the field of human rights into account in her
endeavours;
“13. Invites the human rights treaty bodies, when considering reports
submitted by State parties as well as special procedures of the Human Rights
Council, to continue to give attention, within their respective mandates, to
situations and rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities;
“14. Invites the High Commissioner to continue to seek voluntary
contributions to facilitate the effective participation of representatives of non-
governmental organizations and persons belonging to minorities, in particular
those from developing countries, in minority-related activities organized by
the United Nations, particularly its human rights bodies, and in doing so to
give particular attention to ensuring the participation of young people and
women;A/63/430/Add.2
31 08-63473
“15. Invites the independent expert on minority issues to report to the
General Assembly on the implementation of the present resolution at its sixty-
fifth session;
“16. Decides to continue consideration of the question at its sixty-fifth
session under the item entitled ‘Human rights questions’.”
93. At its 43rd meeting, on 20 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution entitled “Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities”
(A/C.3/63/L.25/Rev.1), submitted by Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Peru, Poland, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, the United Kingdom and Uruguay.
94. At the same meeting, the representative of Austria orally revised the draft
resolution by replacing, in the first preambular paragraph, the words “taking into
consideration” by the words “bearing in mind”.
95. Also, at its 43rd meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.25/Rev.1, as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 182, draft
resolution VII).
H. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.27
96. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the representative of Peru, on behalf of
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
the United Kingdom, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) introduced a
draft resolution entitled “Human rights and extreme poverty” (A/C.3/63/L.27).
Subsequently, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
China, Colombia, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ghana,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Arab Emirates and the United Republic of Tanzania joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 32
97. Also at the 38th meeting, the representative of Kuwait made a statement
(A/C.3/63/SR.38).
98. At its 39th meeting, on 11 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.27 (see para. 182, draft resolution VIII).
99. After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of the United States and South Africa (see A/C.3/63/SR.39).
I. Draft resolutions A/C.3/63/L.28
100. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the representative of Egypt, on behalf of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Botswana,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, China, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Suriname,
the Sudan, Swaziland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zambia and
Zimbabwe, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Globalization and its impact on
the full enjoyment of all human rights” (A/C.3/63/L.28).
101. Subsequently, Azerbaijan, Bolivia, El Salvador, the Gambia, Honduras,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and Viet Nam also
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
102. At the 43rd meeting, on 20 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.28 by a recorded vote of 125 to 53, with 3 abstentions (see para. 182,
draft resolution IX). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, UnitedA/63/430/Add.2
33 08-63473
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Brazil, Chile, Singapore.
103. Before the vote, a statement was made by the representative of France (on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the
European Union and associated countries); after the vote, a statement was made by
the representative of Egypt (see A/C.3/63/SR.43).
J. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.29
104. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the representative of Gabon, on behalf of
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar,
Mali, Morocco, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Swaziland and Zambia,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Subregional Centre for Human Rights and
Democracy in Central Africa” (A/C.3/63/L.29). Subsequently, Albania, Austria,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Chile, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Djibouti,
El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Honduras, Italy, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi,
Namibia, Nigeria, Portugal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Uganda, the United States and
the United Republic of Tanzania joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
105. At the 43rd meeting, on 20 November, the Secretary of the Committee read out
a statement of programme budget implications in connection with the draft
resolution (A/C.3/63/SR.43). Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.29, without a vote (see para. 182, draft resolution X).
K. Draft resolutions A/C.3/63/L.30 and Rev.1
106. At the 39th meeting, on 11 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced a draft resolution entitled “The right to
development” (A/C.3/63/L.30). Subsequently, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominica,
El Salvador and Somalia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution, which read:
“The General Assembly,A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 34
“Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses, in
particular, the determination to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom, as well as to employ international mechanisms for the
promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
“Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
“Recalling also the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences
and summits in the economic and social fields,
“Recalling further that the Declaration on the Right to Development,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986,
confirmed that the right to development is an inalienable human right and that
equality of opportunity for development is a prerogative both of nations and of
individuals who make up nations, and that the individual is the central subject
and beneficiary of development,
“Stressing that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
reaffirmed the right to development as a universal and inalienable right and an
integral part of fundamental human rights, and the individual as the central
subject and beneficiary of development,
“Reaffirming the objective of making the right to development a reality
for everyone, as set out in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted
by the General Assembly on 8 September 2000,
“Deeply concerned that the majority of indigenous peoples in the world
live in conditions of poverty, and recognizing the critical need to address the
negative impact of poverty and inequity on indigenous peoples by ensuring
their full and effective inclusion in development and poverty eradication
programmes,
“Reaffirming the universality, indivisibility, interrelatedness,
interdependence and mutually reinforcing nature of all civil, cultural,
economic, political and social rights, including the right to development,
“Expressing deep concern over the suspension once again of the trade
negotiations of the World Trade Organization, and reaffirming the need for a
successful outcome of the Doha Development Round in key areas such as
agriculture, market access for non-agricultural products, trade facilitation,
development and services,
“Recalling the outcome of the eleventh session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, held in São Paulo, Brazil, from 13 to
18 June 2004, on the theme ‘Enhancing the coherence between national
development strategies and global economic processes towards economic
growth and development, particularly of developing countries’,
“Recalling also all its previous resolutions, Human Rights Council
resolution 9/3 of 24 September 2008, previous resolutions of the Council and
those of the Commission on Human Rights on the right to development, in
particular Commission resolution 1998/72 of 22 April 1998, on the urgent needA/63/430/Add.2
35 08-63473
to make further progress towards the realization of the right to development as
set out in the Declaration on the Right to Development,
“Welcoming the outcome of the ninth session of the Working Group on
the Right to Development of the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva from
18 to 22 August 2008, as contained in the report of the Working Group and as
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General on the right to development,
“Recalling the Fourteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana on 15 and 16 September 2006, the
Fifteenth Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Tehran on 29 and 30 July 2008, and the
Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Putrajaya, Malaysia, on 29 and 30 May 2006,
“Reiterating its continuing support for the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development as a development framework for Africa,
“Recognizing that poverty is an affront to human dignity,
“Recognizing also that extreme poverty and hunger are the greatest
global threat that requires the collective commitment of the international
community for its eradication, pursuant to Millennium Development Goal 1,
and therefore calling upon the international community, including the Human
Rights Council, to contribute towards achieving that goal,
“Recognizing further that historical injustices have undeniably
contributed to the poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization, social
exclusion, economic disparity, instability and insecurity that affect many
people in different parts of the world, in particular in developing countries,
“Stressing that poverty eradication is one of the critical elements in the
promotion and realization of the right to development and that poverty is a
multifaceted problem that requires a multifaceted and integrated approach in
addressing economic, political, social, environmental and institutional
dimensions at all levels, especially in the context of the Millennium
Development Goal of halving, by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people
whose income is less than one dollar a day and the proportion of people who
suffer from hunger,
“1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations adopted by
consensus by the Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human
Rights Council at its ninth session, and calls for their immediate, full and
effective implementation by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other relevant actors;
“2. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Working Group as
renewed by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 9/3, with the
recognition that the Working Group will convene annual sessions of five
working days and present its reports to the Council;
“3. Also supports the realization of the mandate of the high-level task
force on the implementation of the right to development, established within the
framework of the Working Group, as renewed by the Human Rights Council in
its resolution 9/3, with the further recognition that the task force will conveneA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 36
annual sessions of seven working days and present its reports to the Working
Group;
“4. Emphasizes the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution
60/251 of 15 March 2006 establishing the Human Rights Council, and in this
regard calls upon the Council to implement the agreement:
“(a) To continue to act to ensure that its agenda promotes and advances
sustainable development and the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals;
“(b) To lead to raising the right to development, as set out in paragraphs
5 and 10 of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, to the same
level and on a par with all other human rights and fundamental freedoms;
“5. Notes with appreciation that the high-level task force, at its second
meeting, examined Millennium Development Goal 8, on developing a global
partnership for development, and suggested criteria for its periodic evaluation
with the aim of improving the effectiveness of global partnership with regard
to the realization of the right to development;
“6. Stresses the importance of endorsement of the workplan for the task
force for the period 2008-2010, outlined in paragraph 43 of the report of the
Working Group, which would ensure that the criteria for the periodic
evaluation of global partnerships, as identified in Millennium Development
Goal 8, to be submitted by the task force to the Working Group at its eleventh
session in 2010, is extended to other components of Millennium Development
Goal 8;
“7. Also stresses that the above criteria, once considered, revised and
endorsed by the Working Group, should be used, as appropriate, in the
elaboration of a comprehensive and coherent set of standards for the
implementation of the right to development;
“8. Emphasizes the importance that, upon completion of the three
phases of the road map, the Working Group take appropriate steps to ensure
respect for and practical application of these standards, which could take
various forms, including guidelines on the implementation of the right to
development, and evolve into a basis for consideration of an international legal
standard of a binding nature, through a collaborative process of engagement;
“9. Stresses the importance of the core principles contained in the
conclusions of the Working Group at its third session, congruent with the
purpose of international human rights instruments, such as equality,
non-discrimination, accountability, participation and international cooperation,
as critical to mainstreaming the right to development at the national and
international levels, and underlines the importance of the principles of equity
and transparency;
“10. Also stresses that it is important that the high-level task force and
the Working Group, in the discharge of their mandates, take into account the
need:A/63/430/Add.2
37 08-63473
“(a) To promote the democratization of the system of international
governance in order to increase the effective participation of developing
countries in international decision-making;
“(b) To also promote effective partnerships such as the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development and other similar initiatives with the developing
countries, particularly the least developed countries, for the purpose of the
realization of their right to development, including the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals;
“(c) To strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization
of the right to development at the international level, while urging all States to
undertake at the national level the necessary policy formulation and to institute
the measures required for the implementation of the right to development as a
fundamental human right, and also urging all States to expand and deepen
mutually beneficial cooperation in ensuring development and eliminating
obstacles to development in the context of promoting effective international
cooperation for the realization of the right to development, bearing in mind
that lasting progress towards the implementation of the right to development
requires effective development policies at the national level as well as
equitable economic relations and a favourable economic environment at the
international level;
“(d) To consider ways and means to continue to ensure the
operationalization of the right to development as a priority;
“(e) To mainstream the right to development in the policies and
operational activities of the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
programmes and funds, as well as in policies and strategies of the international
financial and multilateral trading systems, taking into account in this regard
that the core principles of the international economic, commercial and
financial spheres, such as equity, non-discrimination, transparency,
accountability, participation and international cooperation, including effective
partnerships for development, are indispensable in achieving the right to
development and preventing discriminatory treatment arising out of political or
other non-economic considerations, in addressing the issues of concern to the
developing countries;
“11. Requests the Human Rights Council to consider how to ensure that
its Advisory Committee pursues the ongoing work of the former
Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights on the right
to development, in accordance with the relevant provisions of General
Assembly and Commission on Human Rights resolutions, and in compliance
with decisions to be taken by the Human Rights Council, and requests the
Secretary-General to report on progress in this regard to the Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session;
“12. Invites Member States and all other stakeholders to participate
actively in future sessions of the Social Forum, while recognizing the strong
support extended to the Forum at its previous four sessions by the
Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights;
“13. Reaffirms the commitment to implement the goals and targets set
out in all the outcome documents of the major United Nations conferences andA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 38
summits and their review processes, in particular those relating to the
realization of the right to development, recognizing that the realization of the
right to development is critical to achieving the objectives, goals and targets
set in those outcome documents;
“14. Also reaffirms that the realization of the right to development is
essential to the implementation of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action, which regards all human rights as universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, places the human person at the centre of
development and recognizes that, while development facilitates the enjoyment
of all human rights, the lack of development may not be invoked to justify the
abridgement of internationally recognized human rights;
“15. Stresses that the primary responsibility for the promotion and
protection of all human rights lies with the State, and reaffirms that States have
the primary responsibility for their own economic and social development and
that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be
overemphasized;
“16. Reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to create national and
international conditions favourable to the realization of the right to
development, as well as their commitment to cooperate with each other to that
end;
“17. Also reaffirms the need for an international environment that is
conducive to the realization of the right to development;
“18. Stresses the need to strive for greater acceptance, operationalization
and realization of the right to development at the international and national
levels, and calls upon States to institute the measures required for the
implementation of the right to development as a fundamental human right;
“19. Emphasizes the critical importance of identifying and analysing
obstacles impeding the full realization of the right to development at both the
national and the international levels;
“20. Affirms that, while globalization offers both opportunities and
challenges, the process of globalization remains deficient in achieving the
objectives of integrating all countries into a globalized world, and stresses the
need for policies and measures at the national and global levels to respond to
the challenges and opportunities of globalization if this process is to be made
fully inclusive and equitable;
“21. Recognizes that, despite continuous efforts on the part of the
international community, the gap between developed and developing countries
remains unacceptably wide, that developing countries continue to face
difficulties in participating in the globalization process and that many risk
being marginalized and effectively excluded from its benefits;
“22. Expresses its deep concern in this regard at the further aggravation
of the economic and social situation of developing countries as the result of
the ongoing international energy, food and financial crises;
“23. Underlines the fact that the international community is far from
meeting the target set in the United Nations Millennium Declaration of halvingA/63/430/Add.2
39 08-63473
the number of people living in poverty by 2015 and, concerned about the
worsening of the current global food crisis, reaffirms the commitment made to
meet that target, and emphasizes the principle of international cooperation,
including partnership and commitment, between developed and developing
countries towards achieving the goal;
“24. Urges developed countries that have not yet done so to make
concrete efforts towards meeting the targets of 0.7 per cent of their gross
national product for official development assistance to developing countries
and 0.15 to 0.2 per cent of their gross national product to least developed
countries, and encourages developing countries to build on the progress
achieved in ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively to
help to meet development goals and targets;
“25. Recognizes the need to address market access for developing
countries, including in agriculture, services and non-agricultural products, in
particular those of interest to developing countries;
“26. Calls for the implementation of a desirable pace of meaningful
trade liberalization, including in areas under negotiation; implementation of
commitments on implementation-related issues and concerns; review of
special and differential treatment provisions, with a view to strengthening
them and making them more precise, effective and operational; avoidance of
new forms of protectionism; and capacity-building and technical assistance for
developing countries as important issues in making progress towards the
effective implementation of the right to development;
“27. Recognizes the important link between the international economic,
commercial and financial spheres and the realization of the right to
development, stresses, in this regard, the need for good governance and
broadening the base of decision-making at the international level on issues of
development concern and the need to fill organizational gaps, as well as
strengthen the United Nations system and other multilateral institutions, and
also stresses the need to broaden and strengthen the participation of
developing countries and countries with economies in transition in
international economic decision-making and norm-setting;
“28. Also recognizes that good governance and the rule of law at the
national level assist all States in the promotion and protection of human rights,
including the right to development, and agrees on the value of the ongoing
efforts being made by States to identify and strengthen good governance
practices, including transparent, responsible, accountable and participatory
government, that are responsive and appropriate to their needs and aspirations,
including in the context of agreed partnership approaches to development,
capacity-building and technical assistance;
“29. Further recognizes the important role and the rights of women and
the application of a gender perspective as a cross-cutting issue in the process
of realizing the right to development, and notes in particular the positive
relationship between women’s education and their equal participation in the
civil, cultural, economic, political and social activities of the community and
the promotion of the right to development;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 40
“30. Stresses the need for the integration of the rights of children, girls
and boys alike, in all policies and programmes, and for ensuring the promotion
and protection of those rights, especially in areas relating to health, education
and the full development of their capacities;
“31. Welcomes the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS adopted at the
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on 2 June 2006, stresses that
further and additional measures must be taken at the national and international
levels to fight HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases, taking into
account ongoing efforts and programmes, and reiterates the need for
international assistance in this regard;
“32. Also welcomes the entry into force of the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities on 3 May 2008;
“33. Emphasizes its commitment to indigenous peoples in the process of
realization of the right to development, and stresses the commitment to ensure
their rights in the areas of education, employment, vocational training and
retraining, housing, sanitation, health and social security recognized in
international human rights obligations and highlighted in the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples as adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 61/295 of 13 September 2007;
“34. Recognizes the need for strong partnerships with civil society
organizations and the private sector in pursuit of poverty eradication and
development, as well as for corporate social responsibility;
“35. Emphasizes the urgent need for taking concrete and effective
measures to prevent, combat and criminalize all forms of corruption at all
levels, to prevent, detect and deter in a more effective manner international
transfers of illicitly acquired assets and to strengthen international cooperation
in asset recovery consistent with the principles of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, particularly chapter V thereof, stresses the
importance of a genuine political commitment on the part of all Governments
through a firm legal framework, and in this context urges States to sign and
ratify as soon as possible, and States parties to implement effectively, the
Convention;
“36. Also emphasizes the need to strengthen further the activities of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
promotion and realization of the right to development, including ensuring
effective use of the financial and human resources necessary to fulfil its
mandate, and calls upon the Secretary-General to provide the Office of the
High Commissioner with the necessary resources;
“37. Reaffirms the request to the High Commissioner, in mainstreaming
the right to development, to undertake effectively activities aimed at
strengthening the global partnership for development between Member States,
development agencies and the international development, financial and trade
institutions, and to reflect those activities in detail in her next report to the
Human Rights Council;
“38. Calls upon the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as
well as the specialized agencies, to mainstream the right to development inA/63/430/Add.2
41 08-63473
their operational programmes and objectives, and stresses the need for the
international financial and multilateral trading systems to mainstream the right
to development in their policies and objectives;
“39. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to
the attention of Member States, United Nations organs and bodies, specialized
agencies, funds and programmes, international development and financial
institutions, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and non-
governmental organizations;
“40. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session and an interim report to the
Human Rights Council on the implementation of the present resolution,
including efforts undertaken at the national, regional and international levels in
the promotion and realization of the right to development, and invites the
Chairperson of the Working Group on the Right to Development to present a
verbal update to the Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.”
107. At its 46th meeting, on 24 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution (A/C.3/63/L.30/Rev.1), submitted by the sponsors of draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.30. Subsequently, Brazil joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
108. At the same meeting, a statement was made by the representative of Cuba.
109. Also at the 46th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.30/Rev.1 by a recorded vote of 177 to 1, with 2 abstentions (see para.
182, draft resolution XI). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former YugoslavA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 42
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Canada, Israel.
110. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of the United
States and France (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are
members of the European Union and associated countries). After the vote,
statements were made by the representatives of Canada, Switzerland and Finland
(see A/C.3/63/SR.46).
L. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.31
111. At the 39th meeting, on 11 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures” (A/C.3/63/L.31) (see A/C.3/63/SR.39). Subsequently,
China and El Salvador joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
112. At the 44th meeting, on 21 November, the representative of Cuba made a
statement on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/C.3/63/SR.44).
113. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.31 by
a recorded vote of 124 to 52 (see para. 182, draft resolution XII). The voting was as
follows:6
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
__________________
6 After the vote, delegations of Ghana and Zimbabwe stated that, had they been present, they
would have voted in favour of the draft resolution.A/63/430/Add.2
43 08-63473
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
None.
M. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.32
114. At the 39th meeting, on 11 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights” (A/C.3/63/L.32).
Subsequently, China and El Salvador joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
115. At the 44th meeting, on 21 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
the sponsors, orally revised the draft resolution as follows:
(a) In the second preambular paragraph, the word “all” before the word
“resolutions” was deleted;
(b) In operative paragraph 7, after the word “transparency”, the words “as
well as by the elimination of double standards and politicization” were deleted.
116. Subsequently, Brazil joined in sponsoring the draft resolution as orally revised.
117. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.32 as
orally revised (see para. 182, draft resolution XIII).
N. Draft resolutions A/C.3/63/L.34 and Rev.1
118. At the 39th meeting, on 11 November, the representative of France, on behalf
of Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, the Central African Republic, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Monaco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former YugoslavA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 44
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, the United Kingdom and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), introduced a draft resolution (A/C.3/63/L.34) entitled,
“Elimination of all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or
belief”. Subsequently, Albania, Benin, Cape Verde, Colombia, Cyprus, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama, the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova and Serbia joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution, which read as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Recalling its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it
proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
“Recalling also article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
other relevant human rights provisions,
“Recalling further its previous resolutions on the elimination of all forms
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief, including
resolution 62/157 of 18 December 2007, as well as Human Rights Council
resolution 6/37 of 14 December 2007, in which the Council, inter alia,
extended the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or
belief,
“Reaffirming the recognition by the 1993 World Conference on Human
Rights that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated, and its call upon all Governments to take all appropriate measures
in compliance with their international obligations and with due regard to their
respective legal systems to counter intolerance and related violence based on
religion or belief, including practices of discrimination against women and the
desecration of religious sites, recognizing that every individual has the right to
freedom of thought, conscience, expression and religion,
“Considering that religion or belief, for those who profess either, is one
of the fundamental elements in their conception of life and that freedom of
religion or belief should be fully respected and guaranteed,
“Considering also that the disregard for and infringement of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion or belief, have brought, directly or indirectly, wars and
great suffering to humankind,
“Recognizing the important work carried out by the Human Rights
Committee in providing guidance with respect to the scope of the freedom of
religion or belief,
“Resolved to speed up the implementation of the Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief,
“Believing that further intensified efforts are therefore required to
promote and protect the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or
belief and to eliminate all forms of hatred, intolerance and discriminationA/63/430/Add.2
45 08-63473
based on religion or belief, as also noted at the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,
“Reaffirming that one’s freedom of religion or belief includes the
freedom to have or to adopt a religion or whatever belief of his or her choice,
and the freedom, either individually or in community with others and in public
or private, to manifest that religion or belief in worship, observance, practice
and teaching,
“Reaffirming also that freedom to manifest one’s religion or belief may
be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary
to protect public safety, order, health or morals or the fundamental rights and
freedoms of others and emphasizing that any such limitations must be
non-discriminatory and must pursue a legitimate aim and be proportionate to
this aim,
“Concerned at attacks on religious places, sites and shrines, including
any deliberate destruction of relics and monuments,
“Seriously concerned at any abuse of registration procedures and at the
resort to discriminatory registration procedures as a means to limit the right to
freedom of religion or belief of members of certain religious communities, at
the limitations placed on religious materials and at the obstacles placed in the
way of construction of places of worship inconsistent with the exercise of the
right to freedom of religion or belief,
“Recognizing that a formal or legal distinction at national level between
different kinds of religions or beliefs may constitute discrimination and may
impinge on the enjoyment of the freedom of religion or belief,
“Recognizing also the importance of interreligious and intrareligious
dialogue and the role of religious and other non-governmental organizations in
promoting tolerance in matters relating to religion or belief, and welcoming
different initiatives in this regard, including the Alliance of Civilizations and
the programmes led by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
“Convinced of the need to address the rise in all parts of the world of
religious extremism that affects the rights of individuals, the situations where
violence and discrimination that affect many women as well as individuals
from other vulnerable groups are carried out in the name of religion or belief
or in accordance with cultural and traditional practices, and the abuse of
religion or belief for ends inconsistent with the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as other relevant instruments of the United Nations,
“Emphasizing that States, regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important role to play in
promoting tolerance, respect and freedom of religion or belief,
“Underlining the importance of education in the promotion of tolerance,
which involves the acceptance by the public of, and its respect for, diversity,
including with regard to religious expression, and underlining also the fact that
education, in particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful way to
promoting tolerance and the elimination of discrimination based on religion or
belief,A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 46
“1. Condemns all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on
religion or belief, as well as violations of freedom of thought, conscience and
religion or belief;
“2. Stresses that the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion applies equally to all people, regardless of their religions or beliefs,
and without any discrimination as to their equal protection by the law;
“3. Emphasizes that, as underlined by the Human Rights Committee,
restrictions on the freedom to manifest religion or belief are permitted only if
limitations are prescribed by law, are necessary to protect public safety, order,
health or morals, or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others, and are
applied in a manner that does not vitiate the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion;
“4. Expresses concern over the persistence of institutionalized social
intolerance and discrimination practised against many in the name of religion
or belief;
“5. Recalls that legal procedures pertaining to religious or belief-based
groups and places of worship are not a prerequisite for the exercise of the right
to manifest one’s religion or belief;
“6. Emphasizes that the conduct of such procedures, as described in
paragraph 5 above, at the national or local level, and as and when legally
required, should be non-discriminatory in order to contribute to the effective
protection of the right of all persons to practise their religion or belief either
individually or in community with others and in public or private;
“7. Recognizes with concern the situation of persons in vulnerable
situations, including persons deprived of their liberty, refugees, asylum-
seekers and internally displaced persons, children, persons belonging to
minorities and migrants, as regards their ability to freely exercise their right to
freedom of religion or belief;
“8. Urges States to step up their efforts to eliminate intolerance and
discrimination based on religion or belief, and to this end:
“(a) To ensure that their constitutional and legislative systems provide
adequate and effective guarantees of freedom of thought, conscience, religion
and belief to all without distinction, inter alia, by the provision of effective
remedies in cases where the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion
or belief, or the right to practise freely one’s religion, including the right to
change one’s religion or belief, is violated;
“(b) To ensure that no one within their jurisdiction is deprived of the
right to life, liberty or security of person because of religion or belief and that
no one is subjected to torture or arbitrary arrest or detention on that account
and to bring to justice all perpetrators of violations of these rights;
“(c) To ensure that no one is discriminated against on the basis of his or
her religion or belief when accessing, inter alia, education, medical care,
employment, humanitarian assistance or social benefits;
“(d) To review, whenever relevant, existing registration practices in
order to ensure that such practices do not limit the right of any person toA/63/430/Add.2
47 08-63473
manifest his or her religion or belief, alone or in community with others and in
public or in private;
“(e) To ensure that no official documents are withheld for reasons
grounded in a person’s religion or belief and that if religious affiliation is
mentioned in any such documents, the individual has the right to refrain from
disclosing this type of information, or to indicate ‘other religion’ or ‘no
religion’;
“(f) To refrain from forcing someone who wishes to fill a public post to
take an oath swearing his or her allegiance to any religion against his will;
“(g) To provide, in the case where official recognition of religious
marriages exists, for the alternative of a civil registration of marriages;
“(h) To ensure the right of all persons to worship or assemble in
connection with a religion or belief and their right to establish and maintain
places for these purposes and the right of all persons to write, issue and
disseminate relevant publications in these areas;
“(i) To ensure, in particular, that, in accordance with appropriate
national legislation and in conformity with international human rights law, the
freedom of all persons and members of groups to establish and maintain
religious, charitable or humanitarian institutions is fully respected and
protected;
“(j) To exert the utmost efforts, in accordance with their national
legislation and in conformity with international human rights law, to ensure
that religious places, sites, shrines and symbols are fully respected and
protected and to take additional measures in cases where they are vulnerable to
desecration and destruction;
“(k) To ensure that all public officials and civil servants, including
members of law enforcement bodies, the military and educators, in the course
of fulfilling their official duties, respect all religions or beliefs and do not
discriminate for reasons based on religion or belief, and that all necessary and
appropriate education or training is provided;
“9. Recognizes with deep concern the overall rise in instances of
intolerance and violence directed against members of many religious and other
communities in various parts of the world, including cases motivated by
Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and Christianophobia;
“10. Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use
of print, audio-visual or electronic media or any other means;
“11. Emphasizes that respect for freedom of opinion and expression is of
crucial importance to efforts to eliminate all forms of intolerance and of
discrimination based on religion or belief;
“12. Urges States to step up their efforts to eliminate intolerance and
discrimination based on religion or belief, notably by:
“(a) Taking all necessary and appropriate action, in conformity with
international standards of human rights, to combat hatred, discrimination andA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 48
acts of violence, intimidation and coercion motivated by intolerance based on
religion or belief, as well as incitement to hostility and violence, with
particular regard to members of religious minorities in all parts of the world;
“(b) Devoting particular attention to practices that violate the human
rights of women and discriminate against women, including in the exercise of
their right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief;
“(c) Ensuring that any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence is prohibited by law;
“(d) Promoting and encouraging, through education and other means,
understanding, tolerance and respect in all matters relating to freedom of
religion or belief and undertaking all appropriate efforts to encourage those
engaged in teaching to promote mutual understanding and tolerance;
“13. Stresses the need to strengthen dialogue and notes in this regard the
Alliance of Civilizations and the High Representative for the Alliance of
Civilizations and the designation, in pursuance of the request made to the
Secretary-General in General Assembly resolution 61/221 of 20 December
2006, of a focal point within the Secretariat to interact with various entities in
the United Nations system and coordinate their contribution to dialogue;
“14. Emphasizes the importance of a continued and strengthened
dialogue among and within religions or beliefs, at all levels and with a broader
participation, including of women, to promote greater tolerance, respect and
mutual understanding;
“15. Invites all actors to address in the context of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, inter alia, the following issues within the framework of
international human rights:
“(a) The rise of religious extremism affecting religions in all parts of the
world;
“(b) The situations where violence and discrimination that affect many
women as well as individuals from other vulnerable groups are carried out in
the name of religion or belief or in accordance with cultural and traditional
practices;
“(c) The abuse of religion or belief for ends inconsistent with the
Charter of the United Nations and other relevant instruments of the United
Nations;
“16. Welcomes and encourages the continuing efforts of all actors in
society, including non-governmental organizations and bodies and groups
based on religion or belief, to promote the implementation of the Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief, and further encourages their work in promoting freedom of
religion or belief and in highlighting cases of religious intolerance,
discrimination and persecution;
“17. Recommends that States, the United Nations and other actors,
including non-governmental organizations and bodies and groups based on
religion or belief, in their efforts to promote freedom of religion or belief,A/63/430/Add.2
49 08-63473
ensure the widest possible dissemination of the text of the Declaration, in as
many different languages as possible, and promote its implementation;
“18. Welcomes the work and the interim report of the Special Rapporteur
on freedom of religion or belief;
“19. Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur, to respond favourably to her requests to visit their countries and to
provide all necessary information for the effective fulfilment of her mandate;
“20. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Special
Rapporteur receives the necessary resources to fully discharge her mandate;
“21. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
“22. Decides to consider the question of the elimination of all forms of
religious intolerance at its sixty-fourth session under the item entitled
‘Promotion and protection of human rights’.”
119. At the 47th meeting, on 24 November, the Committee had before it a revised
text of the draft resolution (A/C.3/63/L.34/Rev.1), submitted by Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, the Central
African Republic, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Monaco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). Subsequently, Albania,
Benin, Canada, Cape Verde, Colombia, Cyprus, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Montenegro, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Serbia and the United States had joined in sponsoring the
revised draft resolution, which read as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Recalling its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it
proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
“Recalling also article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
other relevant human rights provisions,
“Recalling further its previous resolutions on the elimination of all forms
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief, including
resolution 62/157 of 18 December 2007, as well as Human Rights Council
resolution 6/37 of 14 December 2007, in which the Council, inter alia,
extended the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or
belief,
“Reaffirming the recognition by the 1993 World Conference on Human
Rights that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated, and its call upon all Governments to take all appropriate measures
in compliance with their international obligations and with due regard to theirA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 50
respective legal systems to counter intolerance and related violence based on
religion or belief, including practices of discrimination against women and the
desecration of religious sites, recognizing that every individual has the right to
freedom of thought, conscience, expression and religion,
“Considering that religion or belief, for those who profess either, is one
of the fundamental elements in their conception of life and that freedom of
religion or belief should be fully respected and guaranteed,
“Considering also that the disregard for and infringement of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion or belief, have brought, directly or indirectly, wars and
great suffering to humankind,
“Recognizing the important work carried out by the Human Rights
Committee in providing guidance with respect to the scope of the freedom of
religion or belief,
“Resolved to speed up the implementation of the Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief,
“Believing that further intensified efforts are therefore required to
promote and protect the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or
belief and to eliminate all forms of hatred, intolerance and discrimination
based on religion or belief, as also noted at the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,
“Reaffirming that everyone has the right to freedom of thought,
conscience, religion or belief, which includes the freedom to change one’s
religion or belief and the freedom, either alone or in community with others
and in public or private, to manifest one’s religion or belief in teaching,
practice, worship and observance,
“Concerned at attacks on religious places, sites and shrines, including
any deliberate destruction of relics and monuments,
“Seriously concerned at misuse of registration procedures and at the
resort to discriminatory registration procedures as a means to limit the right to
freedom of religion or belief of members of certain religious communities, at
the limitations placed on religious materials and at the obstacles placed in the
way of construction of places of worship inconsistent with the exercise of the
right to freedom of religion or belief,
“Noting that a formal or legal distinction at national level between
different kinds of religions or beliefs may, in some cases, constitute
discrimination and may impinge on the enjoyment of the freedom of religion
or belief,
“Recognizing the importance of interreligious and intrareligious dialogue
in promoting tolerance in matters relating to religion or belief, and welcoming
different initiatives in this regard, including the Alliance of Civilizations and
the programmes led by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,A/63/430/Add.2
51 08-63473
“Emphasizing that States, regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important role to play in
promoting tolerance, respect and freedom of religion or belief,
“Convinced of the need to address the rise in all parts of the world of
religious extremism that affects the rights of individuals, the situations where
violence and discrimination that affect many women as well as individuals
from other vulnerable groups are carried out in the name of religion or belief
or in accordance with cultural and traditional practices, and the misuse of
religion or belief for ends inconsistent with the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as other relevant instruments of the United Nations,
“Underlining the importance of education in the promotion of tolerance,
which involves the acceptance by the public of, and its respect for, diversity,
including with regard to religious expression, and underlining also the fact that
education, in particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful way to
promoting tolerance and the elimination of discrimination based on religion or
belief,
“1. Condemns all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on
religion or belief, as well as violations of freedom of thought, conscience and
religion or belief;
“2. Stresses that the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion applies equally to all people, regardless of their religions or beliefs,
and without any discrimination as to their equal protection by the law;
“3. Emphasizes that, as underlined by the Human Rights Committee,
restrictions on the freedom to manifest one’s religion or belief are permitted
only if limitations are prescribed by law, are necessary to protect public safety,
order, health or morals, or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others, and
are applied in a manner that does not vitiate the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion, which implies that those limitations must be non-
discriminatory and directly related and proportionate to the specific need on
which they are predicated;
“4. Recognizes with deep concern the overall rise in instances of
intolerance and violence directed against members of many religious and other
communities in various parts of the world, including cases motivated by
Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and Christianophobia;
“5. Expresses concern over the persistence of institutionalized social
intolerance and discrimination practised against many in the name of religion
or belief;
“6. Recalls that legal procedures pertaining to religious or belief-based
groups and places of worship are not a prerequisite for the exercise of the right
to manifest one’s religion or belief;
“7. Emphasizes that the conduct of such procedures, as described in
paragraph 5 above, at the national or local level, and as and when legally
required, should be non-discriminatory in order to contribute to the effective
protection of the right of all persons to practise their religion or belief either
individually or in community with others and in public or private;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 52
“8. Recognizes with concern the situation of persons in vulnerable
situations, including persons deprived of their liberty, refugees, asylum-
seekers and internally displaced persons, children, persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and migrants, as regards
their ability to freely exercise their right to freedom of religion or belief;
“9. Urges States to step up their efforts to eliminate intolerance and
discrimination based on religion or belief, and to this end:
“(a) To ensure that their constitutional and legislative systems provide
adequate and effective guarantees of freedom of thought, conscience, religion
and belief to all without distinction, inter alia, by the provision of effective
remedies in cases where the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion
or belief, or the right to practise freely one’s religion, including the right to
change one’s religion or belief, is violated;
“(b) To ensure that no one within their jurisdiction is deprived of the
right to life, liberty or security of person because of religion or belief and that
no one is subjected to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, or arbitrary arrest or detention on that account and to bring to
justice all perpetrators of violations of these rights;
“(c) To ensure that no one is discriminated against on the basis of his or
her religion or belief when accessing, inter alia, education, medical care,
employment, humanitarian assistance or social benefits;
“(d) To review, whenever relevant, existing registration practices in
order to ensure that such practices do not limit the right of any person to
manifest his or her religion or belief, alone or in community with others and in
public or in private;
“(e) To ensure that no official documents are withheld for reasons
grounded in a person’s religion or belief and that if religious affiliation is
mentioned in any such documents, the individual has the right to refrain from
disclosing this type of information, or to indicate ‘other religion’ or ‘no
religion’’
“(f) To refrain from forcing someone who wishes to fill a public post to
take an oath swearing his or her allegiance to any religion against his will;
“(g) To provide, in the case where official recognition of religious
marriages exists, for the alternative of a civil registration of marriages;
“(h) To ensure the right of all persons to worship or assemble in
connection with a religion or belief and their right to establish and maintain
places for these purposes and the right of all persons to write, issue and
disseminate relevant publications in these areas;
“(i) To ensure, in particular, that, in accordance with appropriate
national legislation and in conformity with international human rights law, the
freedom of all persons and members of groups to establish and maintain
religious, charitable or humanitarian institutions is fully respected and
protected;
“(j) To exert the utmost efforts, in accordance with their national
legislation and in conformity with international human rights law, to ensureA/63/430/Add.2
53 08-63473
that religious places, sites, shrines and symbols are fully respected and
protected and to take additional measures in cases where they are vulnerable to
desecration and destruction;
“(k) To ensure that all public officials and civil servants, including
members of law enforcement bodies, the military and educators, in the course
of fulfilling their official duties, respect all religions or beliefs and do not
discriminate for reasons based on religion or belief, and that all necessary and
appropriate education or training is provided;
“10. Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use
of print, audio-visual or electronic media or any other means;
“11. Emphasizes that freedom of religion or belief and freedom of
expression are interdependent, interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
“12. Urges States to step up their efforts to eliminate intolerance and
discrimination based on religion or belief, notably by:
“(a) Taking all necessary and appropriate action, in conformity with
international standards of human rights, to combat hatred, discrimination and
acts of violence, intimidation and coercion motivated by intolerance based on
religion or belief, as well as incitement to hostility and violence, with
particular regard to members of religious minorities in all parts of the world,
and devoting particular attention to practices that violate the human rights of
women and discriminate against women, including in the exercise of their
right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief;
“(b) Promoting and encouraging, through education and other means,
understanding, tolerance and respect in all matters relating to freedom of
religion or belief and undertaking all appropriate efforts to encourage those
engaged in teaching to promote mutual understanding, tolerance and respect;
“13. Stresses the need to strengthen dialogue, inter alia, through the
Alliance of Civilizations and the High Representative for the Alliance and the
focal point designated within the Secretariat, as welcomed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 62/90, to interact with various entities in the United
Nations system and coordinate their contribution to dialogue;
“14. Emphasizes the importance of a continued and strengthened
dialogue among and within religions or beliefs, at all levels and with a broader
participation, including of women, to promote greater tolerance, respect and
mutual understanding;
“15. Invites all actors to address in the context of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, inter alia, the following issues within the framework of
international human rights:
“(a) The rise of religious extremism affecting religions in all parts of the
world;
“(b) The situations where violence and discrimination that affect many
women as well as individuals from other vulnerable groups are carried out in
the name of religion or belief or in accordance with cultural and traditional
practices;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 54
“(c) The misuse of religion or belief for ends inconsistent with the
Charter of the United Nations as well as other relevant instruments of the
United Nations;
“16. Welcomes and encourages the continuing efforts of all actors in
society, including non-governmental organizations and bodies and groups
based on religion or belief, to promote the implementation of the Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief, and further encourages their work in promoting freedom of
religion or belief and in highlighting cases of religious intolerance,
discrimination and persecution;
“17. Recommends that States, the United Nations and other actors,
including non-governmental organizations and bodies and groups based on
religion or belief, in their efforts to promote freedom of religion or belief,
ensure the widest possible dissemination of the text of the Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief, in as many different languages as possible, and promote its
implementation;
“18. Welcomes the work and the interim report of the Special Rapporteur
on freedom of religion or belief;
“19. Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur, to respond favourably to her requests to visit their countries and to
provide all necessary information for the effective fulfilment of her mandate;
“20. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Special
Rapporteur receives the necessary resources to fully discharge her mandate;
“21. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
“22. Decides to consider the question of the elimination of all forms of
religious intolerance at its sixty-fourth session under the item entitled
‘Promotion and protection of human rights’.”
120. At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of France,
the Sudan and Egypt (see A/C.3/63/SR.47).
121. At the 48th meeting, on 25 November, the representative of France orally
revised draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.34/Rev.1. The revisions were circulated in an
informal text.
122. At the same meeting, Australia, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Mauritius,
Thailand, Turkey, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uruguay also joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution, as orally revised.
123. The representative of Uganda made a statement on behalf of the States
members of the United Nations that are members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (see A/C.3/63/SR.48).
124. Also at its 48th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.34/Rev.1, as orally revised (see para. 182, draft resolution XIV).A/63/430/Add.2
55 08-63473
O. Draft resolutions A/C.3/63/L.35 and Rev.1 and amendments
thereto contained in documents A/C.3/63/L.74 and A/C.3/63/L.75
125. At the 35th meeting, on 4 November, the representative of Sweden, on behalf
of Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Timor-Leste, Ukraine, the United Kingdom and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions” (A/C.3/63/L.35). The Republic of Korea and Uruguay joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution, which read:
“The General Assembly,
“Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which guarantees
the right to life, liberty and security of person, the relevant provisions of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and other relevant human
rights conventions,
“Reaffirming the mandate of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, as set out in Human
Rights Council resolution 8/3,
“Welcoming the universal ratification of the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949, which alongside human rights law provide an important
framework of accountability in relation to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions during armed conflict,
“Mindful of all its resolutions on the subject of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions and the resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights
and of the Human Rights Council on the subject,
“Noting with deep concern that impunity continues to be a major cause of
the perpetuation of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions,
“Acknowledging that international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are complementary and not mutually exclusive,
“Noting with deep concern the growing number of civilians and persons
hors de combat killed in situations of armed conflict and internal strife,
“Acknowledging that extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions may
under certain circumstances amount to genocide, crimes against humanity or
war crimes, as defined in international law, including in the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, and recalling in this regard that each
individual State has the primary responsibility to protect its populations from
such crimes,
“Convinced of the need for effective action to prevent, combat and
eliminate the abhorrent practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitraryA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 56
executions, which represent flagrant violations of human rights, particularly
the right to life,
“1. Strongly condemns once again all the extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions that continue to occur throughout the world;
“2. Demands that all States ensure that the practice of extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions is brought to an end and that they take
effective action to prevent, combat and eliminate the phenomenon in all its
forms and manifestations;
“3. Reiterates the obligation of all States to conduct exhaustive and
impartial investigations into all suspected cases of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, to identify and bring to justice those responsible, while
ensuring the right of every person to a fair and public hearing by a competent,
independent and impartial tribunal established by law, to grant adequate
compensation within a reasonable time to the victims or their families, and to
adopt all necessary measures, including legal and judicial measures, to put an
end to impunity and to prevent the further occurrence of such executions, as
recommended in the Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation
of Extralegal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions;
“4. Calls upon Governments and invites intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to pay greater attention to the work of
national-level commissions of inquiry into extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions with a view to encouraging, facilitating and monitoring compliance
with relevant international human rights standards;
“5. Calls upon all States in which the death penalty has not been
abolished to prevent extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions by
complying with their obligations under relevant provisions of international
human rights instruments, including in particular articles 6, 7 and 14 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and articles 37 and 40 of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, bearing in mind the safeguards and
guarantees set out in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/50 of
25 May 1984 and 1989/64 of 24 May 1989, and taking into account the
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur regarding the need to respect
essential procedural guarantees, including the right to seek pardon or
commutation of sentence;
“6. Urges all States:
“(a) To take all necessary and possible measures, in conformity with
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, to prevent
loss of life, in particular that of children, during public demonstrations,
internal and communal violence, civil unrest, public emergencies or armed
conflicts, and to ensure that the police, law enforcement agents, armed forces
and other agents acting on behalf of or with the consent or acquiescence of the
State act with restraint and in conformity with international human rights law
and international humanitarian law, including the principles of proportionality
and necessity, and in this regard to ensure that police and law enforcement
officials are guided by the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials
and the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law
Enforcement Officials;A/63/430/Add.2
57 08-63473
“(b) To ensure the effective protection of the right to life of all persons
under their jurisdiction and to investigate promptly and thoroughly all killings,
including those targeted at specific groups of persons, such as racially
motivated violence leading to the death of the victim, killings of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, of refugees,
internally displaced persons, migrants, street children or members of
indigenous communities, killings of persons for reasons related to their
activities as human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists or demonstrators,
killings committed in the name of passion or in the name of honour, all killings
committed for any discriminatory reason, including sexual orientation, as well
as all other cases where a person’s right to life has been violated, and to bring
those responsible to justice before a competent, independent and impartial
judiciary at the national or, where appropriate, international level, and to
ensure that such killings, including those committed by security forces, police
and law enforcement agents, paramilitary groups or private forces, are neither
condoned nor sanctioned by State officials or personnel;
“7. Affirms the obligation of States, in order to prevent extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions, to protect the lives of all persons deprived of
their liberty in all circumstances and to investigate and respond to deaths in
custody;
“8. Urges all States to ensure that persons deprived of their liberty are
treated humanely and with full respect for their human rights and to ensure
that their treatment, including judicial guarantees, and conditions conform to
the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and, where
applicable, to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and the Additional
Protocols thereto of 8 June 1977 in relation to all persons detained in armed
conflict, as well as to other pertinent international instruments;
“9. Welcomes the International Criminal Court as an important
contribution to ending impunity concerning extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, and, taking note of the growing awareness of the Court worldwide,
calls upon those States that are under an obligation to cooperate with the Court
to provide such cooperation and assistance in the future, in particular with
regard to arrest and surrender, the provision of evidence, the protection and
relocation of victims and witnesses and the enforcement of sentences, and
further welcomes the fact that one hundred and eight States have already
ratified or acceded to and that one hundred and thirty-nine States have signed
the Rome Statute of the Court, and calls upon all those States that have not
ratified or acceded to the Rome Statute to give serious consideration to doing
so;
“10. Acknowledges the importance of ensuring the protection of
witnesses for the prosecution of those suspected of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, and urges States to intensify efforts to establish and
implement effective witness protection programmes, and in this regard
encourages the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to develop practical tools designed to encourage and facilitate greater
attention to the protection of witnesses;
“11. Encourages Governments and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to organize training programmes and toA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 58
support projects with a view to training or educating military forces, law
enforcement officers and government officials in human rights and
humanitarian law issues connected with their work and to include a gender and
child rights perspective in such training, and appeals to the international
community and requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to support endeavours to that end;
“12. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special
Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions to the General Assembly;
“13. Commends the important role that the Special Rapporteur plays
towards the elimination of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and
encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue, within his mandate, to collect
information from all concerned, to respond effectively to reliable information
that comes before him, to follow up on communications and country visits and
to seek the views and comments of Governments and to reflect them, as
appropriate, in his reports;
“14. Acknowledges the important role of the Special Rapporteur in
identifying cases where extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary executions could
amount to genocide and crimes against humanity or war crimes, and urges him
to collaborate with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and, as appropriate, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, in addressing situations of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions that are of particularly serious concern or in which early
action might prevent further deterioration;
“15. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Special
Rapporteur and other United Nations mechanisms and procedures in the field
of human rights, and encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue efforts in
that regard;
“16. Urges all States, in particular those that have not done so, to
cooperate with the Special Rapporteur so that his mandate can be carried out
effectively, including by favourably and rapidly responding to requests for
visits, mindful that country visits are one of the essential tools for the
fulfilment of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, and by responding in a
timely manner to communications and other requests transmitted to them by
the Special Rapporteur;
“17. Expresses its appreciation to those States that have received the
Special Rapporteur and asks them to examine his recommendations carefully,
invites them to inform him of the actions taken on those recommendations, and
requests other States to cooperate in a similar way;
“18. Again requests the Secretary-General to continue to use his best
endeavours in cases where the minimum standards of legal safeguards
provided for in articles 6, 9, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights appear not to have been respected;
“19. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur
with adequate human, financial and material resources to enable him to carry
out his mandate effectively, including through country visits;A/63/430/Add.2
59 08-63473
“20. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close
collaboration with the High Commissioner, in conformity with the mandate of
the High Commissioner established by the General Assembly in its resolution
48/141 of 20 December 1993, to ensure that personnel specialized in human
rights and humanitarian law issues form part of United Nations missions,
where appropriate, in order to deal with serious violations of human rights,
such as extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions;
“21. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth and sixty-fifth sessions a report on the situation worldwide
in regard to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and his
recommendations for more effective action to combat this phenomenon;
“22. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its sixty-
fifth session.”
126. At its 46th meeting, on 24 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution entitled “Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions”
(A/C.3/63/L.35/Rev.1), submitted by Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
127. At the same meeting, the Secretary read out a statement of programme budget
implications in connection with the draft resolution (see A/C.3/63/SR.46).
128. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Sweden, speaking also on
behalf of the Nordic countries, made a statement (see A/C.3/63/SR.46) and orally
revised the text by replacing operative paragraph 5, which read:
“5. Calls upon all States in which the death penalty has not been
abolished to prevent extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions by
complying with their obligations under relevant provisions of international
human rights instruments including in particular articles 6, 7 and 14 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and articles 37 and 40 of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, bearing in mind the safeguards and
guarantees set out in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/50 of
25 May 1984 and 1989/64 of 24 May 1989, and taking into account the
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur regarding the need to respect
essential procedural guarantees, including the right to seek pardon or
commutation of sentence;”
with a new paragraph which read:
“Calls upon all States, in order to prevent extrajudicial, summary and
arbitrary executions, to comply with their obligations under relevant
provisions of international human rights instruments, and further calls upon
those States which have not abolished the death penalty to pay particularA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 60
regard to the provisions contained in articles 6, 14 and 15 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and articles 37 and 40 of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, bearing in mind the safeguards and
guarantees set out in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/50 of 25
May 1984 and 1989/64 of 24 May 1989, and taking into account the
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur regarding the need to respect
essential procedural guarantees, including the right to seek pardon or
commutation of sentence;”
129. Also at the 46th meeting, the representative of Sweden requested a vote on the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.75.
Action on amendments to draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.35/Rev.1 contained in
documents A/C.3/63/L.74 and A/C.3/63/L.75
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.74
130. At the 46th meeting, the representative of Uganda, on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, made a statement, in view of the oral revisions made by the
representative of Sweden to operative paragraph 5, in which she withdrew the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.74 (see A/C.3/63/SR.46).
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.75
131. Also at the 46th meeting, the representative of Uganda, on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, introduced the amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.75, by
which operative paragraph 6 (b) would be revised as follows:
(a) The words “killings of persons affected by terrorism, hostage-taking or
foreign occupation, killings” would be deleted;
(b) The words “peoples under foreign occupation” would be inserted before
the word “refugees”;
(c) The words “including sexual orientation” would be replaced by the word
“whatsoever”,
and, in view of the statement made by the representative of Sweden, the
representative of Uganda requested a separate vote on the amendments contained in
paragraphs 1 (a) and (b) and a separate vote on the amendment contained in
paragraph 1 (c).
132. At the same meeting, by a recorded vote of 60 to 78, with 29 abstentions, the
Committee rejected the proposed amendment contained in paragraphs 1 (a) and (b).
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Chad, China, Comoros,
Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Egypt, Gabon, Gambia, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, SaudiA/63/430/Add.2
61 08-63473
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cape Verde, Costa Rica, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Madagascar, Mongolia, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sri Lanka, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan.
133. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Finland,
Sweden, Denmark and the Syrian Arab Republic (see A/C.3/63/SR.46).
134. At the 47th meeting, on 24 November, following the rejection of the
amendments contained in document A/C.3/63/L.75, statements were made by the
representatives of Costa Rica and Egypt (see A/C.3/63/SR.47).
135. Also at the 47th meeting, by a recorded vote of 59 to 77, with 25 abstentions,
the Committee rejected the proposed amendment contained in paragraph 1 (c). The
voting was as follows:
In favour:
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 62
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Botswana, Burundi,
Cambodia, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Madagascar,
Mongolia, Namibia, Rwanda, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, United Republic of Tanzania.
136. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Argentina, the
Netherlands and Sweden (see A/C.3/63/SR.47).
Action on draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.35/Rev.1
137. At its 47th meeting, the representative of Benin made a statement in which he
announced that his delegation withdrew as a sponsor of the draft resolution, as
revised (see A/C.3/63/SR.47).
138. Also at the 47th meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution, as orally
revised, by a recorded vote of 121 to nil, with 57 abstentions (see para. 182, draft
resolution XV). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).A/63/430/Add.2
63 08-63473
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Angola, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, China, Comoros, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Gambia, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali,
Myanmar, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
139. Before the vote, a statement was made by the representative of Sweden; after
the vote, statements were made by the representatives of the United States, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Israel, the Sudan, Barbados, Jamaica and Egypt (see
A/C.3/63/SR.47).
P. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.36
140. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the representative of Azerbaijan, on
behalf of Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Benin, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Ecuador, Georgia, Germany,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Nigeria, Peru, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Spain, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), introduced a draft resolution
entitled “Missing persons” (A/C.3/63/L.36). Subsequently, Albania, Angola,
Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Colombia, the Congo, Egypt,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Qatar, the Republic
of Moldova, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Uganda and the United States joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
141. At the 43rd meeting, on 20 November, the representative of Azerbaijan, orally
revised the draft resolution in the third preambular paragraph by replacing the word
“Welcoming” with the word “Acknowledging”. The representative of Lebanon made
a statement and withdrew as a sponsor of the draft resolution (see A/C.3/63/SR.43).
142. Also at the 43rd meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.36, as orally revised (see para. 182, draft resolution XVI).
Q. Draft resolutions A/C.3/63/L.38 and Rev.1
143. At the 39th meeting, on 11 November, the representative of Mexico, on behalf
of Argentina, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Tajikistan and Uruguay, introduced a
draft resolution entitled “Protection of migrants” (A/C.3/63/L.38). Subsequently,
Algeria, Armenia, Benin, the Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana,A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 64
Guinea, Haiti, Iraq, Morocco, Nigeria, Sri Lanka and the Sudan joined in sponsoring
the draft resolution, which read:
“The General Assembly,
“Recalling all its previous resolutions on the protection of migrants, the
most recent of which is resolution 62/156 of 18 December 2007, and recalling
also Human Rights Council resolution 9/5 of 24 September 2008,
“Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in its sixtieth
anniversary year, which proclaims that all human beings are born free and
equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and
freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any kind, in particular as to
race, colour or national origin,
“Reaffirming also that everyone has the right to freedom of movement
and residence within the borders of each State, and to leave any country,
including his own, and return to his country,
“Recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations and the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families,
“Recalling also the provisions concerning migrants contained in the
outcomes of all major United Nations conferences and summits,
“Underlining the importance of the Human Rights Council in promoting
respect for the protection of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all,
including migrants,
“Recalling advisory opinion OC-16/99 of 1 October 1999 on the Right to
Information on Consular Assistance in the Framework of the Guarantees of the
Due Process of Law and advisory opinion OC-18/03 of 17 September 2003 on
the Juridical Condition and Rights of Undocumented Migrants, issued by the
Inter American Court of Human Rights,
“Taking note of the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of
31 March 2004 in the case concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals,
and recalling the obligations of States reaffirmed therein and subsequent
rulings of the International Court of Justice following that Judgment,
“Recalling the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development, held in New York on 14 and 15 September 2006 for the purpose
of discussing the multidimensional aspects of international migration and
development, which recognized the relationship between international
migration, development and human rights, and taking note of the second
meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development, organized and
hosted by the Government of the Philippines from 27 to 30 October 2008,A/63/430/Add.2
65 08-63473
“Recalling also its resolution 62/270 on the Global Forum on Migration
and Development, in which, inter alia, it recognized that exchanges of
information and expertise, consultation and closer cooperation between the
Global Forum on Migration and Development and the United Nations could
have a positive impact,
“Noting with appreciation in this regard the conclusions and
recommendations of the international meeting on the protection of the rights of
children in the context of international migration, held on 30 September and
1 October 2008 in Mexico City, co-organized by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which will be presented to the
Global Forum on Migration and Development as a contribution to the
discussion on the matter,
“Emphasizing the global character of the migratory phenomenon, the
importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation and dialogue in
this regard, as appropriate, and the need to protect the human rights of
migrants, particularly at a time in which migration flows have increased in the
globalized economy and take place in a context of new security concerns,
“Bearing in mind that policies and initiatives on the issue of migration,
including those that refer to the orderly management of migration, should
promote holistic approaches that take into account the causes and
consequences of the phenomenon, as well as the full respect for the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants,
“Noting that many migrant women are employed in the informal
economy and in less skilled work compared with that of men, which puts those
women at greater risk of abuse and exploitation,
“Concerned about the large and growing number of migrants, especially
women and children, who place themselves in a vulnerable situation by
attempting to cross international borders without the required travel
documents, and underlining the obligation of States to respect the human
rights of those migrants,
“Expressing deep concern at the excessive detention periods to which
undocumented migrants might be subject,
“Underlining the importance for States, in cooperation with
non-governmental organizations, to undertake information campaigns aimed at
clarifying opportunities, limitations and rights in the event of migration, so as
to enable everyone to make informed decisions and to prevent them from
utilizing dangerous means to cross international borders,
“1. Calls upon States to promote and protect effectively the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their migration
status, especially those of women and children, and to address international
migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue
and through a comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles
and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting
and protecting the human rights of all migrants, and avoiding approaches that
might aggravate their vulnerability;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 66
“2. Also calls upon States to ensure that their laws and policies,
including in the areas of counter-terrorism and combating transnational
organized crime such as trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants,
fully respect the human rights of migrants;
“3. Calls upon States that have not done so to consider signing and
ratifying or acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families as a matter of
priority, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to raise
awareness of and promote the Convention;
“4. Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and supplementing protocols thereto, namely,
the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, to implement them fully, and calls upon States that have
not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to them as a matter of priority;
“5. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families on its seventh
and eighth sessions;
“6. Requests all States, international organizations and relevant
stakeholders to take into account in their policies and initiatives on migration
issues the global character of the migratory phenomenon and to give due
consideration to international, regional and bilateral cooperation in this field,
including by undertaking dialogues on migration that include countries of
origin, destination and transit, as well as civil society, including migrants, with
a view to addressing, in a comprehensive manner, inter alia, its causes and
consequences and the challenge of undocumented or irregular migration,
granting priority to the protection of the human rights of migrants;
“7. Expresses concern about legislation and measures adopted by some
States that may restrict the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
migrants, and reaffirms that, when exercising their sovereign right to enact and
implement migratory and border security measures, States have the duty to
comply with their obligations under international law, including international
human rights law, in order to ensure full respect for the human rights of
migrants;
“8. Deeply regrets and expresses concern about the adoption of
regulations that criminalize undocumented migration;
“9. Expresses the view that, as a rule, undocumented migrants should
not be subject to detention, and calls on Member States to avoid excessive
periods of detention and respect unequivocally the inherent dignity of
migrants;
“10. Urges all States to refrain from taking any type of measure that
stigmatizes any group of individuals, regardless of their migration status;
“11. Requests States to adopt concrete measures to prevent the violation
of the human rights of migrants while in transit, including in ports and airports
and at borders and migration checkpoints, to train public officials who work in
those facilities and in border areas to treat migrants respectfully and inA/63/430/Add.2
67 08-63473
accordance with the law, and to prosecute, in conformity with applicable law,
any act of violation of the human rights of migrants, inter alia, arbitrary
detention, torture and violations of the right to life, including extrajudicial
executions, during their transit from their country of origin to the country of
destination and vice versa, including their transit through national borders;
“12. Recalls that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes
that everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national
tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted to him or her;
“13. Commends States that have successfully implemented alternative
measures to detention for undocumented migrants as a best practice that
deserves serious consideration by all States;
“14. Urges States to ensure that repatriation mechanisms allow for the
identification and special protection of persons in vulnerable situations and
take into account, in conformity with their international obligations and
commitments, the principle of the best interest of the child and family
reunification;
“15. Underlines the right of migrants to return to their country of
citizenship;
“16. Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to ensure full
respect for and observance of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, in
particular with regard to the right of all foreign nationals, regardless of their
immigration status, to communicate with a consular official of the sending
State in case of arrest, imprisonment, custody or detention, and the obligation
of the receiving State to inform the foreign national without delay of his or her
rights under the Convention;
“17. Strongly condemns the manifestations and acts of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against migrants and the
stereotypes often applied to them, including on the basis of religion or belief,
and urges States to apply and, where applicable, reinforce the existing laws
when xenophobic or intolerant acts, manifestations or expressions against
migrants occur, in order to eradicate impunity for those who commit
xenophobic and racist acts;
“18. Requests all States, in conformity with national legislation and
applicable international legal instruments to which they are party, to enforce
labour law effectively, including by addressing violations of such law, with
regard to migrant workers’ labour relations and working conditions, inter alia,
those related to their remuneration and conditions of health, safety at work and
the right to freedom of association;
“19. Encourages all States to remove obstacles that may prevent the
safe, unrestricted and expeditious transfer of remittances of migrants to their
country of origin or to any other countries, in conformity with applicable
legislation, and to consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other problems
that may impede such transfers;
“20. Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries,
that allow migrants to integrate fully into the host countries, facilitate family
reunification and promote a harmonious, tolerant and respectful environment,A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 68
and encourages States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of
programmes;
“21. Requests Member States, the United Nations system, international
organizations, civil society and all relevant stakeholders, especially the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur on
the human rights of migrants, to ensure that the perspective of the human
rights of migrants is included among the priority issues in the ongoing
discussions on international migration and development within the United
Nations system, bearing in mind the discussions of the High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development held pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 58/208 of 23 December 2003;
“22. Invites the Chairperson of the Committee on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to address the
General Assembly at its future sessions under the agenda item ‘Promotion and
protection of human rights’;
“23. Invites the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants to
present his report to the General Assembly at its future sessions under the
agenda item ‘Promotion and protection of human rights’;
“24. Invites Member States to strengthen their efforts to develop data
and statistics as well as to collect information on the contribution of migrants
to all spheres of society and to provide such data to the Secretary-General;
“25. Welcomes the inclusion of the item on the human rights of migrants
in the agenda of the Global Forum on Migration and Development and
encourages organizers of the Global Forum to continue to include the human
rights perspective;
“26. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the resources necessary,
from within existing resources of the United Nations, for the Committee on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families to meet for two separate sessions in 2009, the first session to be of
two consecutive weeks’ duration and the second session to be of one week’s
duration, for the purpose of meeting the demands of the workload arising from
the increasing number of reports of States parties that have been submitted to
the Committee, and invites the Committee to consider ways of further
improving the effectiveness of its working sessions;
“27. Also requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation
of the present resolution at its sixty- fourth session and to include in that report
an analysis of the ways and means to promote the human rights of migrants,
taking into account the views of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants, and decides to examine the question further under the item entitled
‘Promotion and protection of human rights’”.
144. At its 44th meeting, on 21 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution entitled “Protection of migrants” (A/C.3/63/L.38/Rev.1), submitted
by the sponsors of draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.38 and Afghanistan, Albania, Angola,
Bangladesh, Belize, Bolivia, the Congo, the Gambia, Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, theA/63/430/Add.2
69 08-63473
Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Turkey. Subsequently, Burkina Faso,
Cape Verde, the Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau joined in sponsoring
the draft resolution.
145. At the same meeting, the representative of Mexico orally revised the text as
follows:
(a) In the eighth preambular paragraph, after the words “recalling the
obligations of States reaffirmed therein”, the remainder of the paragraph was
deleted;
(b) In the eleventh preambular paragraph, after the words “Migration and
Development”, the words “as adopted” were inserted.
146. Also at the 44th meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution, as orally
revised (see para. 182, draft resolution XVII).
147. After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), France (on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union and
associated countries) and the United States (see A/C.3/63/SR.44).
R. Draft resolutions A/C.3/63/L.39 and Rev.1 and amendments
thereto contained in document A/C.3/63/L.78
148. At the 39th meeting, on 11 November, the representative of Mexico, on behalf
of Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Senegal, Serbia Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United States and Uruguay,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism” (A/C.3/63/L.39). Subsequently, Albania,
Angola, Armenia, Benin, Cape Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Iceland, Indonesia,
Iraq, Montenegro, Nigeria, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) joined in sponsoring the draft resolution, which
read:
“The General Assembly,
“Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
“Reaffirming also the fundamental importance, including in response to
terrorism and the fear of terrorism, of respecting all human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law,
“Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
“Reaffirming further that States are under the obligation to protect all
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons,A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 70
“Reiterating the important contribution of measures taken at all levels
against terrorism, consistent with international law, in particular international
human rights law and refugee and humanitarian law, to the functioning of
democratic institutions and the maintenance of peace and security and thereby
to the full enjoyment of human rights, as well as the need to continue this
fight, including through international cooperation and the strengthening of the
role of the United Nations in this respect,
“Deeply deploring the occurrence of violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the context of the fight against terrorism, as well as
violations of international refugee law and international humanitarian law,
“Recognizing that respect for all human rights, respect for democracy and
respect for the rule of law are interrelated and mutually reinforcing,
“Noting with concern measures that can undermine human rights and the
rule of law, such as the detention of persons suspected of acts of terrorism in
the absence of a legal basis for detention and due process guarantees, the
deprivation of liberty that amounts to placing a detained person outside the
protection of the law, the trial of suspects without fundamental judicial
guarantees, the illegal deprivation of liberty and transfer of individuals
suspected of terrorist activities, and the return of suspects to countries without
individual assessment of the risk of there being substantial grounds for
believing that they would be in danger of subjection to torture, and limitations
to effective scrutiny of counter-terrorism measures,
“Stressing that measures used in the fight against terrorism, including the
profiling of individuals and the use of diplomatic assurances, memorandums of
understanding and other transfer agreements or arrangements, must be in
compliance with the obligations of States under international law, including
international human rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law,
“Recalling article 30 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
reaffirming that acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations are activities aimed at the destruction of human rights,
fundamental freedoms and democracy, threatening the territorial integrity and
security of States and destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments, and
that the international community should take the necessary steps to enhance
cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism,
“Reaffirming its unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by
whomsoever committed, regardless of their motivation, as criminal and
unjustifiable, and renewing its commitment to strengthen international
cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism,
“Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
“Noting the declarations, statements and recommendations of a number
of human rights treaty monitoring bodies and special procedures on the
question of the compatibility of counter-terrorism measures with human rights
obligations,A/63/430/Add.2
71 08-63473
“Emphasizing the importance of properly interpreting and implementing
the obligations of States with respect to torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, and of abiding strictly by the definition of
torture contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, in the fight against
terrorism,
“Recalling its resolutions 57/219 of 18 December 2002, 58/187 of
22 December 2003, 59/191 of 20 December 2004, 60/158 of 16 December
2005, 61/171 of 19 December 2006 and 62/159 of 18 December 2007,
Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2003/68 of 25 April 2003, 2004/87
of 21 April 2004 and 2005/80 of 21 April 2005, and other relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and the Human
Rights Council, including Council decision 2/112 of 27 November 2006 and
resolution 7/7 of 27 March 2008,
“Acknowledging the work of the Human Rights Council in promoting
respect for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the
fight against terrorism,
“Recognizing the importance of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, adopted on 8 September 2006, and reaffirming its relevant
clauses on measures to ensure respect for human rights for all, international
humanitarian law and the rule of law as the fundamental basis for the fight
against terrorism,
“Recalling also its resolution 62/272 of 5 September 2008, by which,
after the first review of the implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, it called upon the United Nations entities involved in supporting
counter-terrorism efforts to continue to facilitate the promotion and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
“1. Reaffirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
terrorism complies with their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law;
“2. Deeply deplores the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims
and their families, expresses its profound solidarity with them, and stresses the
importance of providing them with assistance;
“3. Reaffirms the obligation of States, in accordance with article 4 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to respect certain
rights as non-derogable in any circumstances, recalls, in regard to all other
Covenant rights, that any measures derogating from the provisions of the
Covenant must be in accordance with that article in all cases, and underlines
the exceptional and temporary nature of any such derogations;
“4. Calls upon States to raise awareness about the importance of these
obligations among national authorities involved in combating terrorism;
“5. Reaffirms that counter-terrorism measures should be implemented
in full consideration of the human rights of persons belonging to minorities
and must not be discriminatory on grounds such as race, colour, sex, language,
religion or social origin;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 72
“6. Calls upon States not to resort to profiling based on stereotypes
founded on grounds of discrimination prohibited by international law,
including on racial, ethnic and/or religious grounds;
“7. Urges States, while countering terrorism, to fully comply with their
obligations in respect of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, in particular the absolute prohibition of torture;
“8. Urges States to fully respect non-refoulement obligations under
international refugee and human rights law and, at the same time, to review,
with full respect for these obligations and other legal safeguards, the validity
of a refugee status decision in an individual case if credible and relevant
evidence comes to light that indicates that the person in question has
committed any criminal acts, including terrorist acts, falling under the
exclusion clauses under international refugee law;
“9. Calls upon States to refrain from returning persons, including in
cases related to terrorism, to their countries of origin or to a third State
whenever such transfer would be contrary to their obligations under
international law, in particular human rights law, international humanitarian
law and international refugee law, including in cases where there are
substantial grounds for believing that they would be in danger of subjection to
torture, or where their life or freedom would be threatened in violation of
international refugee law on account of their race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion, bearing in mind
obligations that States may have to prosecute individuals not returned;
“10. Also calls upon States to ensure that guidelines and practices in all
border control operations and other pre-entry mechanisms are clear and fully
respect their obligations under international law, particularly refugee law and
human rights law, towards persons seeking international protection;
“11. Urges States, while countering terrorism, to ensure due process
guarantees, consistent with all relevant provisions of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, and their obligations under the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and under the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the
Additional Protocols thereto, and the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees and the 1967 Protocol thereto in their respective fields of
applicability;
“12. Also urges all States to take all necessary steps to ensure that
persons deprived of liberty, regardless of the place of arrest or detention,
benefit from the guarantees to which they are entitled under international law,
including the review of the detention and, when subjected to trial, fundamental
judicial guarantees;
“13. Opposes any form of deprivation of liberty that amounts to placing
a detained person outside the protection of the law, and urges States to respect
the safeguards concerning the liberty, security and dignity of the person and to
treat all prisoners in all places of detention in accordance with international
law, including human rights law and international humanitarian law;
“14. Acknowledges the adoption of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance in its resolutionA/63/430/Add.2
73 08-63473
61/177 of 20 December 2006, and recognizes that the entry into force of the
Convention will be an important step in support of the rule of law in
countering terrorism;
“15. Reaffirms that it is imperative that all States work to uphold and
protect the dignity of individuals and their fundamental freedoms, as well as
democratic practices and the rule of law, while countering terrorism;
“16. Encourages States, while countering terrorism, to take into account
relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions on human rights, and
encourages them to give due consideration to the recommendations of the
special procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council and the
relevant comments and views of United Nations human rights treaty bodies;
“17. Calls upon States to ensure that their laws criminalizing acts of
terror and terrorism-related acts are accessible, formulated with precision,
non-discriminatory, non-retroactive and in accordance with international law,
including human rights law;
“18. Emphasizes that targeted sanctions are a significant tool in
countering terrorism and have a direct impact on targeted individuals and
entities, recognizes the need to continue ensuring that fair and clear procedures
are strengthened in order to enhance the efficiency and transparency of the
United Nations targeted sanctions regime and in this regard welcomes the
modifications introduced by the Security Council in its resolution 1822 (2008)
of 30 June 2008, including the relevant provisions regarding the review of the
Consolidated List, and encourages the Security Council and its Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) to continue enhancing their
efforts in support of these objectives, while taking into consideration further
relevant and appropriate proposals;
“19. Urges States, while ensuring full compliance with their
international obligations, to include adequate human rights guarantees in their
national procedures for the listing of individuals and entities with a view to
combating terrorism;
“20. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General
and the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism submitted pursuant to resolution 62/159, and takes note of
the recommendations and conclusions contained therein;
“21. Welcomes the ongoing dialogue established in the context of the
fight against terrorism between the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the relevant bodies for the promotion and protection of human
rights, and encourages the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee to strengthen the links and to continue to develop cooperation with
relevant human rights bodies, in particular with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism and other relevant special procedures and mechanisms of
the Human Rights Council, giving due regard to the promotion and protection
of human rights in the ongoing work pursuant to relevant Security Council
resolutions relating to terrorism;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 74
“22. Calls upon States and other relevant actors, as appropriate, to
continue to implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which, inter alia, reaffirms respect for human rights for all and the rule of law
as the fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism;
“23. Requests the Office of the High Commissioner and the Special
Rapporteur to continue to contribute to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, including by raising awareness about the need to
respect human rights while countering terrorism;
“24. Requests the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to
continue its efforts to ensure that entities of the United Nations system can
better coordinate and enhance their support to Member States in their efforts to
implement their obligations under international law, including international
human rights law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law
while countering terrorism;
“25. Calls upon international, regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen information-sharing, coordination and cooperation in promoting the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism;
“26. Acknowledges with appreciation the cooperation between the
Special Rapporteur and all other relevant procedures and mechanisms of the
Human Rights Council as well as the United Nations human rights treaty
bodies, and urges them to continue their cooperation, in accordance with their
mandates, and to coordinate their efforts, where appropriate, in order to
promote a consistent approach on this subject;
“27. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur in the performance of the tasks and duties mandated, including by
reacting promptly to the urgent appeals of the Special Rapporteur and
providing the information requested, as well as to cooperate with other
relevant procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council dealing
with the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism;
“28. Calls upon States to give serious consideration to responding
favourably to requests by the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries;
“29. Welcomes the work of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to implement the mandate given to her in 2005, in resolution
60/158, and requests the High Commissioner to continue her efforts in this
regard;
“30. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the Human Rights Council and to
the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
“31. Decides to consider at its sixty-fourth session the report of the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.”A/63/430/Add.2
75 08-63473
149. At its 48th meeting, on 25 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution (A/C.3/63/L.39/Rev.1), submitted by the sponsors of A/C.3/63/L.39
and Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Japan and the Russian Federation.
150. Also at the 48th meeting, the representative of Mexico orally revised the text,
as follows:
(a) A new operative paragraph 2 was inserted under operative paragraph 2
which read as follows:
“Expresses serious concern at the occurrence of violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the context of countering terrorism;”
(b) Operative paragraph 18, which had read:
“18. Emphasizes that United Nations terrorism-related targeted sanctions
are a significant tool in countering terrorism and have a direct impact on
targeted individuals and entities, recognizes the need to continue ensuring that
fair and clear procedures are strengthened in order to enhance the efficiency
and transparency of the United Nations terrorism-related sanctions regime, and
welcomes and encourages the Security Council’s continued enhancement of
efforts in support of these objectives, while taking into consideration relevant
and appropriate proposals;
was replaced as follows:
“18. Recognizes the need to continue ensuring that fair and clear
procedures under the United Nations terrorism-related sanctions regime are
strengthened in order to enhance their efficiency and transparency, and
welcomes and encourages the Security Council’s continued enhancement of
efforts in support of these objectives, while emphasizing the importance of
these sanctions in countering terrorism;”
(c) A new operative paragraph was inserted after operative paragraph 26,
which read as follows:
“Requests the Special Rapporteur, within the context of his mandate, to
continue to make recommendations with regard to preventing, combating and
redressing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the context
of countering terrorism;”
151. Subsequently, Australia, Egypt, the Gambia, the Republic of Moldova,
Suriname and Ukraine joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
Amendment contained in A/C.3/63/L.78
152. At its 48th meeting, the Committee had before it an amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.39/Rev.1 contained in document A/C.3/63/L.78, submitted by
South Africa.
153. The representative of South Africa made a statement and, in view of the oral
revisions made to the text of draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.39/Rev.1 by Mexico,
withdrew the amendment contained in document A/C.3/63/L.78 (see
A/C.3/63/SR.48).
154. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.39/Rev.1, as orally revised (see para. 182, draft resolution XVIII).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 76
155. After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of Cuba and the Syrian Arab Republic (see A/C.3/63/SR.48).
S. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.41
156. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the representative of Argentina, on
behalf of Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United Kingdom, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), introduced a draft
resolution entitled “International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance” (A/C.3/63/L.41). Subsequently, Bolivia, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Colombia, the Congo, Cyprus, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Mali, Mauritius, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, the Republic of
Korea, Senegal, Serbia, South Africa, Timor-Leste, Togo, Uganda and Ukraine also
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
157. At its 44th meeting, on 21 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.41 (see para. 182, draft resolution XIX). After the adoption of the draft
resolution, a statement was made by the representative of the United States (see
A/C.3/63/SR.44).
T. Draft resolutions A/C.3/63/L.42 and Rev.1
158. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
Angola, Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Burundi, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Kenya, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Namibia, Nepal, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Swaziland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Timor-Leste, Uganda, Ukraine, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe, introduced a draft resolution
entitled “The right to food” (A/C.3/63/L.42). Subsequently, Algeria, Belize, Bhutan,
Botswana, Cambodia, Cameroon, Croatia, Djibouti, Gabon, Guyana, Hungary, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Mauritius, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Suriname, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution, which read as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Reaffirming all previous resolutions and decisions on the right to food
adopted within the framework of the United Nations,A/63/430/Add.2
77 08-63473
“Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which provides
that everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for her or his health
and well-being, including food, the Universal Declaration on the Eradication
of Hunger and Malnutrition and the United Nations Millennium Declaration, in
particular Millennium Development Goal 1, eradicating extreme poverty and
hunger by 2015,
“Recalling also the provisions of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in which the fundamental right of every
person to be free from hunger is recognized,
“Reaffirming the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the
World Food Summit Plan of Action and the Declaration of the World Food
Summit: five years later, adopted in Rome on 13 June 2002,
“Reaffirming also the concrete recommendations contained in the
Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to
Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the
Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in
November 2004,
“Bearing in mind paragraph 6 of its resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006,
“Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, and that they must be treated globally, in a fair
and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
“Reaffirming also that a peaceful, stable and enabling political, social
and economic environment, at both the national and international levels, is the
essential foundation that will enable States to give adequate priority to food
security and poverty eradication,
“Reiterating, as in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the
Declaration of the World Food Summit: five years later, that food should not
be used as an instrument of political or economic pressure, and reaffirming in
this regard the importance of international cooperation and solidarity, as well
as the necessity of refraining from unilateral measures that are not in
accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations and
that endanger food security,
“Convinced that each State must adopt a strategy consistent with its
resources and capacities to achieve its individual goals in implementing the
recommendations contained in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security
and the World Food Summit Plan of Action and, at the same time, cooperate
regionally and internationally in order to organize collective solutions to
global issues of food security in a world of increasingly interlinked
institutions, societies and economies where coordinated efforts and shared
responsibilities are essential,
“Recognizing the complex character of the worsening of the current
global food crisis, which threatens to violate the right to adequate food on a
massive scale,
“Deeply concerned that environmental degradation, desertification and
global climate change are exacerbating destitution and desperation and that theA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 78
lack of the technology necessary to confront their impact, particularly in
developing countries and the least developed countries, is having a negative
impact on the realization of the right to food, in particular in developing
countries,
“Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters,
diseases and pests and their increasing impact in recent years, which have
resulted in massive loss of life and livelihood and threatened agricultural
production and food security, in particular in developing countries,
“Stressing the importance of reversing the continuing decline of official
development assistance devoted to agriculture, both in real terms and as a
share of total official development assistance,
“Recognizing the role of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations as the United Nations agency for rural and agricultural
development and its work in supporting the efforts of Member States to
achieve the full realization of the right to food, including through its provision
of technical assistance to developing countries,
“Taking note of the final Declaration adopted at the International
Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in Porto Alegre, Brazil, on
10 March 2006,
“1. Reaffirms that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of
human dignity and therefore requires the adoption of urgent measures at the
national, regional and international levels for its elimination;
“2. Also reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to safe and
nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and the fundamental
right of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully develop and
maintain his or her physical and mental capacities;
“3. Considers it intolerable that more than 6 million children still die
every year from hunger-related illness before their fifth birthday and that the
number of people who are undernourished has grown to about 923 million
worldwide, and that, while the prevalence of hunger is more striking, in
particular after the global food crisis, the planet could produce enough food to
feed 12 billion people, twice the world’s present population;
“4. Expresses its concern that women and girls are disproportionately
affected by hunger, food insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of gender
inequality and discrimination, that in many countries, girls are twice as likely
as boys to die from malnutrition and preventable childhood diseases and that it
is estimated that almost twice as many women as men suffer from
malnutrition;
“5. Encourages all States to take action to address gender inequality
and discrimination against women, in particular where it contributes to the
malnutrition of women and girls, including measures to ensure the full and
equal realization of the right to food and ensuring that women have equal
access to resources, including income, land and water, to enable them to feed
themselves and their families;A/63/430/Add.2
79 08-63473
“6. Encourages the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on the right to food to continue mainstreaming a gender perspective in the
fulfilment of his mandate, and encourages the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and all other United Nations bodies and
mechanisms addressing the right to food and food insecurity to integrate a
gender perspective into their relevant policies, programmes and activities;
“7. Reaffirms the need to ensure that programmes delivering safe and
nutritious food are inclusive and accessible to persons with disabilities;
“8. Encourages all States to take steps with a view to achieving
progressively the full realization of the right to food, including steps to
promote the conditions for everyone to be free from hunger and, as soon as
possible, to enjoy fully the right to food, and to create and adopt national plans
to combat hunger;
“9. Stresses that comprehensive solutions to the external debt problem,
as well as increasing the market access of developing countries and improving
access to productive resources and public investment in rural development, are
essential elements for eradicating hunger and poverty, in particular in
developing countries, including through the promotion of investments in
appropriate small-scale irrigation and water management technologies in order
to reduce vulnerability to droughts;
“10. Recognizes that 80 per cent of hungry people live in rural areas and
50 per cent are small-scale farm-holders, and that these people are especially
vulnerable to food insecurity, given the increasing cost of inputs and the fall in
farm incomes, that agricultural policies are important tools for promoting land
and agrarian reform, rural credit, technical assistance, access to land, water,
seeds and other natural resources and associated measures to achieve food
security and rural development, and that support by States for small farmers,
fishing communities and local enterprises is a key element for food security
and the provision of the right to food;
“11. Stresses the importance of fighting hunger in rural areas, including
through national efforts supported by international partnerships to stop
desertification and land degradation and through investments and public
policies that are specifically appropriate to the risk of drylands, and in this
regard calls for the full implementation of the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought
and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa;
“12. Urges Member States to promote and protect all human rights of
indigenous peoples in accordance with international human rights instruments
and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
acknowledges that many indigenous organizations and representatives of
indigenous communities have expressed in different forums their deep
concerns over the obstacles and challenges they face for the full enjoyment of
the right to food, and calls upon States to take special actions to combat the
root causes of the disproportionately high level of hunger and malnutrition
among indigenous peoples and the continuous discrimination against them;
“13. Recognizes that food sovereignty is important for achieving food
security and realizing the right to food for all peoples at all times;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 80
“14. Requests all States and private actors, as well as international
organizations within their respective mandates, to take fully into account the
need to promote the effective realization of the right to food for all, including
in the ongoing negotiations in different fields;
“15. Recognizes the need to strengthen national commitment as well as
international assistance, upon the request of and in cooperation with the
affected countries, towards the full realization and protection of the right to
food, and in particular to develop national protection mechanisms for people
forced to leave their homes and land because of hunger;
“16. Stresses the need to make efforts to mobilize and optimize the
allocation and utilization of technical and financial resources from all sources,
including external debt relief for developing countries, and to reinforce
national actions to implement sustainable food security policies;
“17. Calls for the early conclusion and a successful, development-
oriented outcome of the Doha Development Round negotiations of the World
Trade Organization as a contribution to creating international conditions that
permit the full realization of the right to food;
“18. Stresses that all States should make all efforts to ensure that their
international policies of a political and economic nature, including
international trade agreements, do not have a negative impact on the right to
food in other countries;
“19. Recalls the importance of the New York Declaration on Action
against Hunger and Poverty, and recommends the continuation of efforts aimed
at identifying additional sources of financing for the fight against hunger and
poverty;
“20. Recognizes that the commitment made at the World Food Summit in
1996 to halve the number of persons who are undernourished are not being
fulfilled, and invites once again all international financial and development
institutions, as well as the relevant United Nations agencies and funds, to give
priority to and provide the necessary funding to realize the aim of halving by
2015 the proportion of people who suffer from hunger, as well as the right to
food as set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the
United Nations Millennium Declaration;
“21. Reaffirms that integrating food and nutritional support, with the
goal that all people at all times will have access to sufficient, safe and
nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active
and healthy life, is part of a comprehensive response to the spread of
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other communicable diseases;
“22. Urges States to give adequate priority in their development
strategies and expenditures to the realization of the right to food;
“23. Stresses the importance of international development cooperation
and assistance, in particular in activities related to emergency situations,
including those resulting from natural disasters, for the realization of the right
to food and the achievement of sustainable food security, while recognizing
that each country has the primary responsibility for ensuring the
implementation of national programmes and strategies in this regard;A/63/430/Add.2
81 08-63473
“24. Stresses that the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights should be reconciled with the
requirements of food security, conservation and the sustainable use of
biological diversity, and urges Member States to ensure that the
implementation of the Agreement remains fully compatible with their
obligation to promote and protect the right to food, including the right of
farmers to produce food under conditions that ensure an adequate standard of
living;
“25. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other
relevant stakeholders to support national efforts aimed at responding rapidly to
the food crises currently occurring across Africa, and expresses its deep
concern that funding shortfalls are forcing the World Food Programme to cut
operations across different regions, including Southern Africa;
“26. Invites all relevant international organizations, including the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund, to promote policies and projects
that have a positive impact on the right to food, to ensure that partners respect
the right to food in the implementation of common projects, to support
strategies of Member States aimed at the fulfilment of the right to food and to
avoid any actions that could have a negative impact on the realization of the
right to food;
“27. Takes note of the interim report of the Special Rapporteur on the
right to food, and welcomes the work and commitment of the first mandate-
holder to achieving the realization of the right to food;
“28. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur,
as extended by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 6/2;
“29. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide all the necessary human and
financial resources for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur;
“30. Welcomes the work already done by the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights in promoting the right to adequate food, in
particular its General Comment No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food
(article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights), in which the Committee affirmed, inter alia, that the right to adequate
food is indivisibly linked to the inherent dignity of the human person and is
indispensable for the fulfilment of other human rights enshrined in the
International Bill of Human Rights, and is also inseparable from social justice,
requiring the adoption of appropriate economic, environmental and social
policies, at both the national and international levels, oriented to the
eradication of poverty and the fulfilment of all human rights for all;
“31. Recalls General Comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on the
right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the Covenant), in which the Committee
noted, inter alia, the importance of ensuring sustainable water resources for
human consumption and agriculture in realization of the right to adequate
food;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 82
“32. Reaffirms that the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive
Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food
Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations in November 2004, represent a practical tool to promote
the realization of the right to food for all, contribute to the achievement of
food security and thus provide an additional instrument in the attainment of
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the
Millennium Declaration;
“33. Welcomes the continued cooperation of the High Commissioner, the
Committee and the Special Rapporteur, and encourages them to continue their
cooperation in this regard;
“34. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special
Rapporteur in his task, to supply all necessary information requested by him
and to give serious consideration to responding favourably to the requests of
the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his
mandate more effectively;
“35. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on the implementation of the
present resolution and to continue his work, including by examining the
emerging issues with regard to the realization of the right to food within his
existing mandate;
“36. Invites Governments, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, treaty bodies, civil society actors and non-governmental
organizations, as well as the private sector, to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur in the fulfilment of his mandate, inter alia, through the submission
of comments and suggestions on ways and means of realizing the right to food;
“37. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its sixty-
fourth session under the item entitled ‘Promotion and protection of human
rights’.”
159. At its 46th meeting, on 24 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution entitled “The right to food” (A/C.3/63/L.42/Rev.1), submitted by the
sponsors of A/C.3/63/L.42 and Albania, Andorra, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Chad, the Central African Republic, the Comoros, Cyprus, France,
Germany, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Montenegro, Nauru, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Portugal, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu and Ukraine.
160. At the same meeting, the representative of Cuba orally revised the draft
resolution as follows:
(a) In the eleventh preambular paragraph, the words “to be violated” were
inserted after the words “food is threatened”;
(b) A seventeenth preambular paragraph was inserted, which read as follows:
“Acknowledging the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security
Crisis established by the Secretary-General, and supporting the Secretary-A/63/430/Add.2
83 08-63473
General in continuing his efforts in this regard, including the continued
engagement with Member States and the Special Rapporteur on the right to
food;”
(c) In operative paragraph 14, after the words “concepts such as,” the words
“inter alia” were inserted;
(d) Operative paragraph 25, which read:
“25. Also stresses that the World Trade Organization Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights should be implemented
in a manner that is supportive of food security and fully compatible with the
obligation to promote and protect the right to food, while reiterating the
commitment of States parties to that agreement;
was replaced by:
“25. Also stresses that States parties to the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights should
consider implementing that agreement in a manner supportive of food security
while mindful of the obligation of Member States to promote and protect the
right to food;
(e) In operative paragraph 32, after the words “of the Committee” the words
“Economic, Social and Cultural Rights” were inserted.
161. Subsequently, Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Cyprus, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Cape Verde, Chile,
the Congo, Greece, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea, Switzerland, Togo, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and
Yemen joined in sponsoring the draft resolution (see A/C.3/63/SR.46).
162. Also at the 46th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.42/Rev.1, as orally revised, by a recorded vote of 180 to 1 with no
abstentions (see para. 182, draft resolution XX). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 84
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
None.
163. After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Guatemala,
Switzerland, Malaysia, France (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the European Union and associated countries) Finland
and Colombia (see A/C.3/63/SR.46).
U. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.43
164. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
Belarus, Bolivia, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Honduras, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, the Sudan and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), introduced a draft
resolution entitled “Respect for the right to universal freedom of travel and the vital
importance of family reunification” (A/C.3/63/L.43). Subsequently, Angola, the
Philippines and Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
165. At the 43rd meeting, on 20 November, the representative of Cuba made a
statement (see A/C.3/63/SR.43).
166. Also at the 43rd meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.43, by a recorded vote of 118 to 3, with 60 abstentions (see para. 182,
draft resolution XXI). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,A/63/430/Add.2
85 08-63473
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Palau, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
167. Before the vote, the representative of the United States made a statement; after
the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Mexico and the Philippines
(see A/C.3/63/SR.43).
V. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.44
168. At the 38th meeting, on 6 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
Angola, Belarus, Bolivia, Burundi, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Honduras, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nicaragua, Pakistan, the Russian
Federation, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe introduced a draft resolution entitled
“Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order” (A/C.3/63/L.44).
Subsequently, Algeria, Bangladesh, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, El Salvador, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Lebanon, Lesotho, Malaysia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nigeria,
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Swaziland and Zambia joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
169. At its 44th meeting, on 21 November, the representative of Cuba made a
statement and orally revised the draft resolution as follows:
(a) After the sixth preambular paragraph, a new preambular paragraph was
inserted, which read:
“Stressing that the responsibility for managing worldwide economic and
social issues, as well as threats to international peace and security, must be
shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally,
and that in this regard the central role must be played by the United Nations,
as the most universal and representative organization in the world,”A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 86
(b) In the fourteenth preambular paragraph, the words “of the worsening”
were deleted.
(c) After the fifteenth preambular paragraph, a new preambular paragraph
was inserted which read:
“Stressing also the need for adequate financing of and technology
transfer to developing countries, in particular the landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States, including to support their efforts
to adapt to climate change,”
170. Also at the 44th meeting the representative of France (on behalf of the
European Union and associated countries), made a statement (see A/C.3/61/SR.44).
171. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.44 by
a recorded vote of 120 to 52, with 7 abstentions (see para. 182, draft resolution
XXII). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Chile, Mexico, Peru, Timor-Leste, Vanuatu.A/63/430/Add.2
87 08-63473
172. After the vote, the representative of Uzbekistan made a statement regarding
the vote of his country (see A/C.3/63/SR.44).
W. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.45
173. The Committee considered draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.45, entitled “Equitable
geographical distribution in the membership of the human rights treaty bodies”
under sub-items 64 (a) and 64 (b) at its 38th and 43rd meetings on 6 and
20 November.
174. For action taken on the draft resolution and the recommendation of the Third
Committee, see A/63/430/Add.1, paragraphs 12 to 15 and paragraph 17, draft
resolution II.
X. Draft resolutions A/C.3/63/L.46 and Rev.1
175. At the 43rd meeting, on 20 November, the representative of New Zealand, on
behalf of Andorra, Chile, Colombia, France, Liechtenstein, New Zealand, Norway,
Qatar, Switzerland and Uruguay, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Committee
on the Rights of the Child” (A/C.3/63/L.46). Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican
Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Panama, the Republic of Korea, Senegal and
the United Republic of Tanzania joined in sponsoring the draft resolution, which
read:
“The General Assembly,
“Reaffirming the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional
Protocols to the Convention,
“Welcoming the work of the Committee on the Rights of the Child in
examining the progress made by States parties to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto in implementing the
obligations undertaken in the Convention, and the Optional Protocols,
“Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child,
“Noting the proposal of the Committee regarding its working methods,
“1. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the Rights of the Child
and the decision taken by the Committee at its forty-eighth session to request
approval from the General Assembly to meet in parallel chambers so as to
facilitate the effective and timely implementation of its responsibilities under
article 44 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and articles 8 and 12
of its Optional Protocols;
“2. Notes, while welcoming the entry into force of the Optional
Protocols, that a backlog of more than 80 reports exists, related to the
submission by States parties of their initial reports under the Optional
Protocols in conformity with their obligations, and that, if this backlog is not
addressed, it will impede the ability of the Committee to consider reports in a
timely manner;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 88
“3. Expresses its appreciation, in light of this temporary and
exceptional increase in the number of reports before the Committee, for the
efforts of the Committee to reform its working methods so as to consider the
reports of States parties in a timely manner, including its proposal, as an
exceptional and temporary measure, to work in two chambers, taking due
account of equitable geographical distribution, for a period of two years, in
order to clear the backlog of reports;
“4. Decides, as an exceptional and temporary measure, to authorize the
Committee to meet in parallel chambers, of nine members each, for
10 working days during each of its three regular sessions and for five working
days during the weeks of its pre-sessional meetings between October 2009 and
January 2011;
“5. Requests the Committee, when sitting in chambers, to take due
account of equitable geographical distribution and gender balance among
Committee members;
“6. Urges States parties to comply fully with their obligations under the
Convention and the Optional Protocols thereto and to give serious
consideration to the concluding comments as well as the general
recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child;
“7. Urges the Committee to intensify its efforts to review its working
methods in order to further enhance the efficiency and quality of its
proceedings, with the aim of achieving timely consideration of reports
submitted by States parties, and requests the Committee to review and assess
its progress made after two years, taking into account the wider context of
treaty body reform.”
176. At its 48th meeting, on 25 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution entitled “Committee on the Rights of the Child”
(A/C.3/63/L.46/Rev.1), submitted by the sponsors of A/C.3/63/L.46. Subsequently,
Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malta, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Paraguay,
Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Thailand and Turkey joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
177. At the same meeting, the representative of New Zealand orally revised
operative paragraph 2, by replacing the word “four” before the words “regular
sessions” by the word “three” and by replacing the date “January 2011” by the date
“October 2010”.
178. Also at the 48th meeting, the attention of the Committee was drawn to a
statement of programme budget implications on draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.46,
contained in document A/C.3/63/L.61.
179. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Committee made an oral statement
in connection with the revised draft resolution; statements were also made by the
representatives of Chile and Mexico (see A/C.3/63/SR.48).A/63/430/Add.2
89 08-63473
180. Also at its 48th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.46/Rev.1, as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 182, draft
resolution XXIII).
181. After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of Cuba, the United States, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and
Japan (see A/C.3/63/SR.48).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 90
III. Recommendations of the Third Committee
182. The Third Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
the following draft resolutions:
Draft resolution I
Moratorium on the use of the death penalty
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 62/149 of 18 December 2007 on the moratorium on
the use of the death penalty,
Welcoming the decisions taken by an increasing number of States to apply a
moratorium on executions and the global trend towards the abolition of the death
penalty,
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 62/149,1 and the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a report on progress made in
the implementation of resolution 62/149 and the present resolution, for
consideration during its sixty-fifth session, and calls upon Member States to provide
the Secretary-General with information in this regard;
3. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its sixty-fifth session
under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
__________________
1 A/63/293.A/63/430/Add.2
91 08-63473
Draft resolution II
The role of the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human
rights institutions in the promotion and protection of human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1
Reaffirming also the commitment of Member States, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, to promote and ensure the respect of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour,
sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property,
birth or other status,
Recalling further the Principles relating to the status of national institutions for
the promotion and protection of human rights, welcomed by the General Assembly
in its resolution 48/134 of 20 December 1993 and annexed thereto,
Recognizing the role of the existing Ombudsman, whether a male or female,
mediator and other national human rights institutions in the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Underlining the importance of the autonomy and independence of the
Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights institutions, where they
exist, in order to enable them to consider all issues related to the field of their
competences,
Considering the role of the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human
rights institutions in promoting good governance in public administrations, as well
as improving their relations with citizens, and in strengthening the delivery of
public services,
Considering also the important role of the existing Ombudsman, mediator and
other national human rights institutions in contributing to the effective realization of
the rule of law and respect for the principles of justice and equality,
Stressing that these institutions, where they exist, can have an important role in
advising the Government with respect to bringing national legislation and national
practices in line with their international human rights obligations,
Stressing also the importance of international cooperation in the field of
human rights and recalling the role played by regional and international associations
of the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights institutions in
promoting cooperation and sharing best practices,
1. Encourages Member States:
(a) To consider the creation or the strengthening of independent and
autonomous Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights institutions;
(b) To develop, where appropriate, mechanisms of cooperation between
these institutions, where they exist, in order to coordinate their action, strengthen
their achievements and enable the exchange of lessons learned;
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 92
2. Also encourages Member States:
(a) To consider conducting communication campaigns, with other relevant
actors, in order to enhance public awareness on the importance of the role of the
Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights institutions;
(b) To give serious consideration to implementing the recommendations and
proposals of their Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights
institutions, with the aim of addressing claims of the complainants, consistent with
the principles of justice, equality and rule of law;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the
present resolution at the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly;
4. Decides to consider this issue at its sixty-fifth session.A/63/430/Add.2
93 08-63473
Draft resolution III
Regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/127 of 16 December 1977 and its subsequent
resolutions concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of
human rights,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/51 of 9 March
19931 and its subsequent resolutions in this regard, and Human Rights Council
resolution 6/20 of 28 September 2007,2
Bearing in mind the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,3 which reiterates, inter
alia, the need to consider the possibility of establishing regional and subregional
arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights where they do not
already exist,
Recalling that the World Conference recommended that more resources should
be made available for the strengthening of regional arrangements for the promotion
and protection of human rights under the programme of technical cooperation in the
field of human rights of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights,
Reaffirming that regional arrangements play an important role in promoting
and protecting human rights and should reinforce universal human rights standards,
as contained in international human rights instruments,
Welcoming the fact that the Office of the High Commissioner has been
systematically pursuing a regional and subregional approach through a variety of
complementary means and methods, in order to maximize the impact of the
activities of the United Nations at the national level, and that the Office intends to
establish new regional offices,
1. Welcomes the continuing cooperation and assistance of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the further strengthening
of the existing regional arrangements and regional machinery for the promotion and
protection of human rights, in particular through technical cooperation aimed at
national capacity-building, public information and education, with a view to
exchanging information and experience in the field of human rights;
2. Also welcomes, in that respect, the close cooperation of the Office of the
High Commissioner in the organization of regional and subregional training courses
and workshops in the field of human rights, high-level governmental expert
meetings and regional conferences of national human rights institutions;
__________________
1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993, Supplement No. 3 and
corrigenda (E/1993/23 and Corr.2, 4 and 5), chap. II, sect. A.
2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53),
chap. I, sect. A.
3 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 94
3. Recognizes, therefore, that progress in promoting and protecting all
human rights depends primarily on efforts made at the national and local levels, and
that the regional approach should imply intensive cooperation and coordination with
all partners involved, while bearing in mind the importance of international
cooperation;
4. Welcomes the growing exchanges between the United Nations and the
United Nations human rights treaty bodies, on the one hand, and regional
organizations and institutions, such as the African Commission on Human and
Peoples’ Rights, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the Council of
Europe, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the League of Arab States, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and other regional institutions, on the other;
5. Also welcomes the placement by the Office of the High Commissioner of
regional representatives in subregions and in regional commissions;
6. Further welcomes the progress achieved in the establishment of regional
and subregional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
and, in this regard, notes with interest:
(a) The increasing cooperation between the Office of the High
Commissioner and African organizations and suborganizations, in particular the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern African Development
Community;
(b) The support provided by the Office of the High Commissioner to the
African Union for the strengthening of the promotion and protection of human
rights in Africa, and welcomes in this regard the establishment of the African Court
on Human and Peoples’ Rights;
(c) The convening of the fourteenth annual Workshop on Regional
Cooperation for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in the Asia-Pacific
Region, held in Bali, Indonesia, from 10 to 12 July 2007, which, inter alia, included
a discussion on future challenges for the Regional Framework for the Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights in the Asia-Pacific Region and adopted a
comprehensive set of points for follow-up action entitled the “Bali Action Points”;
(d) The ongoing consultations among Governments aimed at the possible
establishment of regional human rights arrangements held in the context of the
Regional Framework, with the support and advice of national human rights
institutions and civil society organizations of the Asia-Pacific region;
(e) The recent decision by the Association of the Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) to develop a mechanism for the promotion and protection of human
rights;
(f) Activities undertaken within the framework of the regional project of the
Office of the High Commissioner for the promotion and protection of human rights
in the Latin American and Caribbean region and the strengthening of the
cooperation between the Office of the High Commissioner, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights and the Organization of American States;A/63/430/Add.2
95 08-63473
(g) Ongoing initiatives to further develop arrangements for the promotion
and protection of human rights by MERCOSUR;
(h) Activities undertaken within the framework of cooperation between the
Office of the High Commissioner and the League of Arab States;
(i) The continued cooperation towards the realization of universal standards
between the Office of the High Commissioner and regional organizations in Europe
and Central Asia, namely, the Council of Europe, and its various human rights
bodies and mechanisms, the European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, in particular for activities at the country level;
7. Invites States in areas in which regional arrangements in the field of
human rights do not yet exist to consider, with the support and advice of national
human rights institutions and civil society organizations, concluding agreements
with a view to establishing, within their respective regions, suitable regional
machinery for the promotion and protection of human rights;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen exchanges
between the United Nations and regional intergovernmental organizations dealing
with human rights and to make available adequate resources from within the regular
budget of technical cooperation to the activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner to promote regional arrangements;
9. Requests the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to pay special
attention to the most appropriate ways of assisting countries of the various regions,
at their request, under the programme of technical cooperation and to make, where
necessary, relevant recommendations, and in this regard welcomes the decision of
the Office to strengthen national protection systems in accordance with action 2 of
the reform programme of the Secretary-General;4
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fifth session a report on the state of regional arrangements for the promotion
and protection of human rights, formulating concrete proposals and
recommendations on ways and means to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional arrangements in the field of human rights, and to include
therein the results of action taken in pursuance of the present resolution;
11. Decides to consider the question further at its sixty-fifth session.
__________________
4 See A/57/387 and Corr.1.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 96
Draft resolution IV
Combating defamation of religions
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the pledge made by all States, under the Charter of the United
Nations, to promote and encourage universal respect for and observance of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as to race, sex, language
or religion,
Recalling the relevant international instruments on the elimination of
discrimination, in particular the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination,1 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,2 the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,3 the Declaration on the Human Rights
of Individuals Who are not Nationals of the Country in which They Live4 and the
Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and
Linguistic Minorities,5
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights and the
Human Rights Council in this regard,
Welcoming the resolve expressed in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration adopted by the General Assembly on 8 September 20006 to take
measures to eliminate the increasing acts of racism and xenophobia in many
societies and to promote greater harmony and tolerance in all societies, and looking
forward to its effective implementation at all levels,
Underlining in this regard the importance of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa,
in 2001,7 welcoming the progress achieved in implementing them, and emphasizing
that they constitute a solid foundation for the elimination of all scourges and
manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Expressing concern at the increase in racist violence and xenophobic ideas in
many parts of the world, in political circles, in the sphere of public opinion and in
society at large, as a result, inter alia, of the resurgence of activities of political
parties and associations established on the basis of racist, xenophobic and
ideological superiority platforms and charters, and the persistent use of those
platforms and charters to promote or incite racist ideologies,
Deeply alarmed at the rising trends towards discrimination based on religion
or belief, including in some national policies, laws and administrative measures that
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 See resolution 36/55.
4 See resolution 40/144, annex.
5 See resolution 47/135, annex.
6 See resolution 55/2.
7 See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.A/63/430/Add.2
97 08-63473
stigmatize groups of people belonging to certain religions and beliefs under a
variety of pretexts relating to security and irregular immigration, thereby
legitimizing discrimination against them, and consequently impairing their
enjoyment of the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, and impeding
their ability to observe, practise and manifest their religion freely and without fear
of coercion, violence or reprisal,
Noting with deep concern the serious instances of intolerance, discrimination
and acts of violence based on religion or belief, intimidation and coercion motivated
by extremism, religious or otherwise, occurring in many parts of the world, in
addition to the negative projection of certain religions in the media and the
introduction and enforcement of laws and administrative measures that specifically
discriminate against and target persons with certain ethnic and religious
backgrounds, particularly Muslim minorities following the events of 11 September
2001, and that threaten to impede their full enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Stressing that defamation of religions is a serious affront to human dignity
leading to the illicit restriction of the freedom of religion of their adherents and
incitement to religious hatred and violence,
Stressing also the need to effectively combat defamation of all religions, and
incitement to religious hatred in general,
Reaffirming that discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief constitutes
a violation of human rights and a disavowal of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Noting with concern that defamation of religions, and incitement to religious
hatred in general, could lead to social disharmony and violations of human rights,
and alarmed at the inaction of some States to combat this burgeoning trend and the
resulting discriminatory practices against adherents of certain religions,
Taking note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance submitted to the
Human Rights Council at its fourth and sixth sessions,8 which draw attention to the
serious nature of the defamation of all religions, and reiterating the call of the
Special Rapporteur to all States to wage a systematic campaign against incitement to
racial and religious hatred by maintaining a careful balance between the defence of
secularism and respect for freedom of religion and by acknowledging and respecting
the complementarity of all the freedoms embodied in internationally agreed human
rights instruments, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,2
Recalling the proclamation of the Global Agenda for Dialogue among
Civilizations,9 and inviting States, the organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, within existing resources, other international and regional
organizations and civil society to contribute to the implementation of the
Programme of Action contained in the Global Agenda,
__________________
8 A/HRC/4/19 and A/HRC/6/6.
9 See resolution 56/6.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 98
Welcoming the efforts of the Alliance of Civilizations initiative in promoting
mutual respect and understanding among different cultures and societies, as well as
the forthcoming second forum of the Alliance, to be held in Istanbul, Turkey, on
2 and 3 April 2009,
Convinced that respect for cultural, ethnic, religious and linguistic diversity, as
well as dialogue among and within civilizations, is essential for peace,
understanding and friendship among individuals and people of the different cultures
and nations of the world, while manifestations of cultural prejudice, intolerance and
xenophobia towards people belonging to different cultures, religions and beliefs
generate hatred and violence among peoples and nations throughout the world,
Recognizing the valuable contributions of all religions and beliefs to modern
civilization and the contribution that dialogue among civilizations can make to an
improved awareness and understanding of common values,
Underlining the important role of education in the promotion of tolerance,
which involves acceptance by the public of, and its respect for, diversity, including
with regard to religious expressions, and underlining also the fact that education
should contribute in a meaningful way to promoting tolerance and the elimination of
discrimination based on religion or belief,
Reaffirming the need for all States to continue their national and international
efforts to enhance dialogue and broaden understanding among civilizations,
cultures, religions and beliefs, and emphasizing that States, regional organizations,
non-governmental organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important
role to play in promoting tolerance, respect for and freedom of religion and belief,
Welcoming all international and regional initiatives aimed at promoting cross-
cultural and interfaith harmony, including the international dialogue on interfaith
cooperation, and the World Conference on Dialogue, held in Madrid from 16 to
18 July 2008, and their valuable efforts towards the promotion of a culture of peace
and dialogue at all levels, and taking note with appreciation of the programmes led
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in this
regard,
Underlining the importance of increasing contacts at all levels in order to
deepen dialogue and reinforce understanding among different cultures, religions,
beliefs and civilizations, and in this regard taking note with appreciation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the Ministerial Meeting on
Human Rights and Cultural Diversity of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
held in Tehran on 3 and 4 September 2007,10
Recalling its resolution 62/154 of 18 December 2007,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General11 and the conclusions
contained therein;
2. Expresses deep concern at the negative stereotyping of religions and
manifestations of intolerance and discrimination in matters of religion or belief still
evident in the world;
__________________
10 A/62/464, annex.
11 A/63/365.A/63/430/Add.2
99 08-63473
3. Strongly deplores all acts of psychological and physical violence and
assaults, and incitement thereto, against persons on the basis of their religion or
belief, and such acts directed against their businesses, properties, cultural centres
and places of worship, as well as targeting of holy sites and religious symbols of all
religions;
4. Expresses deep concern at the programmes and agendas pursued by
extremist organizations and groups aimed at creating and perpetuating stereotypes
about certain religions, in particular when condoned by Governments;
5. Notes with deep concern the intensification of the overall campaign of
defamation of religions, and incitement to religious hatred in general, including the
ethnic and religious profiling of Muslim minorities in the aftermath of the tragic
events of 11 September 2001;
6. Recognizes that, in the context of the fight against terrorism, defamation
of religions, and incitement to religious hatred in general, become aggravating
factors that contribute to the denial of fundamental rights and freedoms of members
of target groups, as well as their economic and social exclusion;
7. Expresses deep concern in this respect that Islam is frequently and
wrongly associated with human rights violations and terrorism;
8. Reiterates the commitment of all States to the implementation, in an
integrated manner, of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which
was adopted without a vote by the General Assembly on 8 September 200612 and
reaffirmed by the Assembly in its resolution 62/272 of 5 September 2008, and which
clearly confirms, inter alia, that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with
any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group, stressing the need to reinforce
the international community’s commitment to promote a culture of peace, justice
and human development, ethnic, national and religious tolerance, and respect for all
religions, religious values, beliefs or cultures and prevent the defamation of
religions;
9. Deplores the use of the print, audio-visual and electronic media,
including the Internet, and any other means to incite acts of violence, xenophobia or
related intolerance and discrimination against any religion, as well as targeting of
religious symbols;
10. Emphasizes that, as stipulated in international human rights law,
everyone has the right to hold opinions without interference, and has the right to
freedom of expression, the exercise of which carries with it special duties and
responsibilities and may therefore be subject to limitations as are provided for by
law and are necessary for respect of the rights or reputations of others, protection of
national security or of public order, public health or morals;
11. Reaffirms that general recommendation XV (42) of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination,13 in which the Committee stipulated that the
prohibition of the dissemination of all ideas based upon racial superiority or hatred
is compatible with freedom of opinion and expression, is equally applicable to the
question of incitement to religious hatred;
__________________
12 Resolution 60/288.
13 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 18
(A/48/18), chap. VIII, sect. B.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 100
12. Welcomes the work undertaken by the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right
to freedom of opinion and expression in accordance with their mandates defined by
the Human Rights Council in its resolutions 7/34 and 7/36 of 28 March 2008;14
13. Strongly condemns all manifestations and acts of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities and migrants and the stereotypes often applied to
them, including on the basis of religion or belief, and urges all States to apply and,
where applicable, reinforce existing laws when such xenophobic or intolerant acts,
manifestations or expressions occur, in order to eradicate impunity for those who
commit xenophobic and racist acts;
14. Reaffirms the obligation of all States to enact the necessary legislation to
prohibit the advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, and encourages States, in their
follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,7
to include aspects relating to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in their national plans of action and, in
this context, to take forms of multiple discrimination against minorities fully into
account;
15. Invites all States to put into practice the provisions of the Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief;3
16. Urges all States to provide, within their respective legal and
constitutional systems, adequate protection against acts of hatred, discrimination,
intimidation and coercion resulting from defamation of religions, and incitement to
religious hatred in general, to take all possible measures to promote tolerance and
respect for all religions and beliefs and the understanding of their value systems and
to complement legal systems with intellectual and moral strategies to combat
religious hatred and intolerance;
17. Also urges all States to ensure that all public officials, including members
of law enforcement bodies, the military, civil servants and educators, in the course
of their official duties, respect people regardless of their different religions and
beliefs and do not discriminate against persons on the grounds of their religion or
belief, and that any necessary and appropriate education or training is provided;
18. Underscores the need to combat defamation of religions, and incitement
to religious hatred in general, by strategizing and harmonizing actions at the local,
national, regional and international levels through education and awareness-raising,
and urges all States to ensure equal access to education for all, in law and in
practice, including access to free primary education for all children, both girls and
boys, and access for adults to lifelong learning and education based on respect for
human rights, diversity and tolerance, without discrimination of any kind, and to
refrain from any legal or other measures leading to racial segregation in access to
schooling;
__________________
14 Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II, sect. A.A/63/430/Add.2
101 08-63473
19. Calls upon all States to exert the utmost efforts, in accordance with their
national legislation and in conformity with international human rights and
humanitarian law, to ensure that religious places, sites, shrines and symbols are fully
respected and protected, and to take additional measures in cases where they are
vulnerable to desecration or destruction;
20. Calls upon the international community to foster a global dialogue to
promote a culture of tolerance and peace at all levels, based on respect for human
rights and diversity of religion and belief, and urges States, non-governmental
organizations, religious leaders and bodies and the print and electronic media to
support and foster such a dialogue;
21. Affirms that the Human Rights Council shall promote universal respect
for all religious and cultural values and address instances of intolerance,
discrimination and incitement of hatred against members of any community or
adherents of any religion, as well as the means to consolidate international efforts in
order to combat impunity for such deplorable acts;
22. Welcomes the initiative by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the recently held expert seminar on freedom of expression and
advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility
or violence, on 2 and 3 October 2008, and requests the High Commissioner to
continue to build on this initiative, with a view to concretely contributing to the
prevention and elimination of all such forms of incitement and the consequences of
negative stereotyping of religions or beliefs, and their adherents, on the human
rights of those individuals and their communities;
23. Takes note of the efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to promote and include human rights aspects in educational
programmes, particularly the World Programme for Human Rights Education
proclaimed by the General Assembly on 10 December 2004,15 and calls upon the
High Commissioner to continue those efforts, with particular focus on:
(a) The contributions of cultures, as well as religious and cultural diversity;
(b) Collaboration with other relevant bodies of the United Nations system
and regional and international organizations in holding joint conferences designed to
encourage dialogue among civilizations and promote understanding of the
universality of human rights and their implementation at various levels, in particular
the Office of the United Nations High Representative for the Alliance of
Civilizations and the unit within the Secretariat mandated to interact with various
entities within the United Nations system and coordinate their contribution to the
intergovernmental process;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution, including on the possible correlation between defamation
of religions and the upsurge in incitement, intolerance and hatred in many parts of
the world, to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.
__________________
15 See resolutions 59/113 A and B.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 102
Draft resolution V
National institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions and those of the Commission on Human Rights
concerning national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Welcoming the rapidly growing interest throughout the world in the creation
and strengthening of independent, pluralistic national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights,
Recalling the “Paris Principles”1 relating to the status and functioning of
effective national institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights,
Reaffirming the important role that such national institutions play and will
continue to play in promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms and in developing and enhancing public awareness of those rights and
freedoms,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations in assisting the
development of independent and effective national human rights institutions, guided
by the Paris Principles, and recognizing also in this regard the potential for
strengthened and complementary cooperation between the United Nations and these
national institutions in the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June l993,2 which reaffirmed the
important and constructive role played by national human rights institutions, in
particular in their advisory capacity to the competent authorities and their role in
remedying human rights violations, in disseminating information on human rights
and in education in human rights,
Recalling also the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,3 in which
Governments were urged to create or strengthen independent national institutions
for the promotion and protection of human rights, including the human rights of
women,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interrelated,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and that all human rights must be treated
in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Bearing in mind the significance of national and regional particularities and
various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds, and that all States, regardless
of their political, economic and cultural systems, have the duty to promote and
protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling the Programme of Action adopted by national institutions, at their
meeting held in Vienna in June 1993 during the World Conference on Human
__________________
1 Resolution 48/134, annex.
2 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3 Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution I, annexes I and II.A/63/430/Add.2
103 08-63473
Rights,4 for the promotion and protection of human rights, in which it was
recommended that United Nations activities and programmes should be reinforced
to meet the requests for assistance from States wishing to establish or strengthen
their national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Noting the valuable role played and contributions made by national institutions
in United Nations meetings dealing with human rights and the importance of their
continued appropriate participation,
Welcoming the strengthening in all regions of regional cooperation among
national human rights institutions and between national human rights institutions
and other regional human rights forums,
Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General to the
Human Rights Council on national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights5 and on the accreditation process of the International Coordinating
Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights,6
Noting with satisfaction the strengthening of the accreditation procedure of the
International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights,
Noting with appreciation the continuing work of the regional human rights
networks in Europe, the Network of National Institutions for the Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights in the Americas, the Asia Pacific Forum of National
Human Rights Institutions and the Network of African National Human Rights
Institutions,
Welcoming the strengthening of international cooperation among national
human rights institutions, including through the International Coordinating
Committee of National Institutions,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;7
2. Reaffirms the importance of the development of effective, independent
and pluralistic national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights, in accordance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions
for the promotion and protection of human rights (“the Paris Principles”);1
3. Recognizes the role of independent national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights in working together with Governments to ensure full
respect for human rights at the national level, including by contributing to follow-up
actions, as appropriate, to the recommendations resulting from the international
human rights mechanisms;
4. Welcomes the increasingly important role of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights in supporting their Government’s
cooperation with the United Nations for the promotion and protection of human
rights;
__________________
4 See A/CONF.157/NI/6.
5 A/HRC/7/69.
6 A/HRC/7/70.
7 A/63/486.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 104
5. Recognizes that, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action,2
it is the right of each State to choose the framework for
national institutions that is best suited to its particular needs at the national level in
order to promote human rights in accordance with international human rights
standards;
6. Also recognizes that national institutions have a crucial role to play in
promoting and ensuring the indivisibility and interdependence of all human rights,
and calls upon States to ensure that all human rights are appropriately reflected in
the mandate of their national human rights institutions when established;
7. Encourages Member States to establish effective, independent and
pluralistic national institutions or, where they already exist, to strengthen them for
the promotion and protection of human rights, as outlined in the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action;
8. Welcomes the growing number of States establishing or considering the
establishment of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights;
9. Encourages national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights established by Member States to continue to play an active role in
preventing and combating all violations of human rights as enumerated in the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action and relevant international
instruments;
10. Recognizes the role played by national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights in the Human Rights Council, including its universal
periodic review mechanism and, the special procedures, as well as in the human
rights treaty bodies, in accordance with Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and
5/2 of 18 June 20078 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/74 of
20 April 2005;9
11. Notes with satisfaction the efforts of those States that have provided their
national institutions with more autonomy and independence, including by giving
them an investigative role or enhancing such a role, and encourages other
Governments to consider taking similar steps;
12. Acknowledges the role of national institutions in the strengthening of the
rule of law and the promotion and protection of human rights in all sectors and
encourages cooperation, where appropriate, with the United Nations system,
international financial institutions, and non governmental organizations;
13. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to give high priority to requests
from Member States for assistance in the establishment and strengthening of
national human rights institutions;
14. Commends the high priority given by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to work on national institutions, encourages
the High Commissioner, in view of the expanded activities relating to national
__________________
8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/62/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
9 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and
corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.A/63/430/Add.2
105 08-63473
institutions, to ensure that appropriate arrangements are made and budgetary
resources provided to continue and further extend activities in support of national
human rights institutions, and invites Governments to contribute additional
voluntary funds to that end;
15. Welcomes the national institutions website10 as an important vehicle for
the delivery of information to national institutions and also the launch of a database
of comparative analysis of procedures and methods of complaint-handling by
national human rights institutions;
16. Notes with appreciation the increasingly active and important role of the
International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights, in close cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in assisting Governments and
national institutions, when requested, to follow up on relevant resolutions and
recommendations concerning the strengthening of national institutions;
17. Also notes with appreciation the holding of regular meetings of the
International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions and the arrangements
for the participation of national human rights institutions in the sessions of the
Human Rights Council;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the necessary
assistance for holding meetings of the International Coordinating Committee of
National Institutions during the sessions of the Human Rights Council, in
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights;
19. Encourages national institutions to seek accreditation status through the
International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions, and notes with
satisfaction the strengthening of the accreditation procedure and the continued
assistance of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in this regard, as well as the assistance of the Office to the Conferences of
the International Coordinating Committee;
20. Welcomes the continuation of the practice of national institutions
convening regional meetings in some regions, and its initiation in others, and
encourages national institutions, in cooperation with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, to organize similar events with Governments and
non-governmental organizations in their own regions;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the necessary
assistance for holding international and regional meetings of national institutions;
22. Recognizes the important and constructive role that the judiciary,
parliament and civil society can play, in cooperation with national institutions, for
better promotion and protection of human rights;
23. Encourages all Member States to take appropriate steps to promote the
exchange of information and experience concerning the establishment and effective
operation of national institutions;
__________________
10 See http://www.nhri.net.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 106
24. Encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms as well as
agencies, funds and programmes to work within their respective mandates with
Member States and national institutions in the promotion and protection of human
rights with respect to, inter alia, projects in the area of good governance and rule of
law, and in this regard welcomes the efforts made by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to develop partnerships in support of
national institutions;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session on the implementation of the present resolution.A/63/430/Add.2
107 08-63473
Draft resolution VI
International Year of Human Rights Learning
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations include promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all,
Recalling also its resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, in which it decided that
the Human Rights Council should, inter alia, promote human rights education and
human rights learning as well as advisory services, technical assistance and
capacity-building,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome, in which Heads of State
and Government expressed their support for the promotion of human rights
education and learning at all levels, including through the implementation of the
World Programme for Human Rights Education, as appropriate, and encouraged all
States to develop initiatives in that regard,1
Recalling its resolution 62/171 of 18 December 2007, by which it proclaimed
the year commencing on 10 December 2008 the International Year of Human Rights
Learning,
Considering that the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights in 2008 is a suitable occasion for the United Nations to increase its
efforts to promote a human rights culture worldwide through human rights learning
as a way of life, at all levels,
Reaffirming the complementarities between the World Programme for Human
Rights Education2 and the International Year of Human Rights Learning,
Recognizing human rights learning as encompassing the acquisition and
internalization of knowledge and understanding of one’s own and others’ human
dignity,
Reaffirming that activities undertaken during the International Year of Human
Rights Learning should broaden and deepen human rights learning on the basis of
the principles of universality, indivisibility, interdependency, impartiality and
objectivity, and on non-selectivity, constructive dialogue and cooperation, with a
view to enhancing the promotion and protection of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms, bearing in mind the duty of the State, regardless of its
political, economic or cultural system, to promote and protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and the significance of national and regional particularities
and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds,
Acknowledging that civil society, academia, the private sector, where
appropriate, and parliamentarians can play an important role at the national, regional
and international levels in the promotion and protection of human rights, including
in the development of ways and means to promote and implement learning about
human rights as a way of life at the community level,
__________________
1 See resolution 60/1, para. 131.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53),
chap. I, resolution 6/24.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 108
1. Reaffirms its conviction that every woman, man, youth and child can
realize his or her full human potential through learning about all human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the ability to act on that knowledge in order to
ensure the effective realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all;
2. Urges Member States to develop throughout the International Year of
Human Rights Learning and beyond, in coordination with civil society, the private
sector, academia and parliamentarians and regional organizations, including the
appropriate specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations
system, international strategies and/or regional, national and local programmes of
action aimed at broad-based and sustained human rights learning at all levels,
bearing in mind the complimentary efforts undertaken within the framework of the
World Programme for Human Rights Education;
3. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Human Rights Council to support, cooperate and collaborate with civil
society, the private sector, academia, regional organizations and other relevant
stakeholders, as well as with organizations, programmes and funds of the United
Nations system, in efforts to develop, in particular, the design of international
strategies and/or regional, national and local programmes of action aimed at broad-
based and sustained human rights learning for all, including seminars and
workshops for community leaders, keeping in mind a long-term multi-year process
involving several countries in all regions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to include the implementation of the
present resolution in the report due to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session in accordance with its resolution 62/171.A/63/430/Add.2
109 08-63473
Draft resolution VII
Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons
Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992 on the Declaration on the
Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic
Minorities, and bearing in mind article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights1 as well as other relevant existing international standards and
national legislation,
Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the effective promotion of the
Declaration, as well as Human Rights Council resolutions 6/15 of 28 September
2007, by which the Council established the Forum on Minority Issues, and 7/6 of
27 March 2008 on the mandate of the independent expert on minority issues,
Noting that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities contributes to political and
social stability and peace and enriches the cultural diversity and heritage of society,
as reaffirmed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome,2
Affirming that effective measures and the creation of favourable conditions for
the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, ensuring effective non-discrimination and
equality for all, as well as full and effective participation in matters affecting them,
contribute to the prevention and peaceful solution of human rights problems and
situations involving them,
Expressing concern at the frequency and severity of disputes and conflicts
involving persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities
in many countries and their often tragic consequences, and that they often suffer
disproportionately from the effects of conflict resulting in the violation of their
human rights and are particularly vulnerable to displacement through, inter alia,
population transfers, refugee flows and forced relocation,
Emphasizing the need for reinforced efforts to meet the goal of the full
realization of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities, including by addressing economic and social conditions and
marginalization, as well as to end any type of discrimination against them,
Emphasizing also the importance of human rights education, training and
learning as well as of dialogue and interaction among all relevant stakeholders and
members of society on the promotion and protection of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities as an integral part
of the development of society as a whole, including the sharing of best practices
such as for the promotion of mutual understanding of minority issues, managing
diversity by recognizing plural identities and promoting inclusive and stable
societies as well as social cohesion therein,
__________________
1 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
2 See resolution 60/1.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 110
Emphasizing further the important role that national institutions can play in the
promotion and protection of rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities as well as in early warning and awareness raising
for problems regarding minority situations,
Acknowledging that the United Nations has an important role to play regarding
the protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities by, inter alia, taking due account of and giving effect to the
Declaration,
1. Reaffirms the obligation of States to ensure that persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities may exercise fully and
effectively all human rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination
and in full equality before the law, as proclaimed in the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, and
draws attention to the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action,3 including the provisions on forms of multiple discrimination;
2. Urges States and the international community to promote and protect the
rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,
as set out in the Declaration, including through the encouragement of conditions for
the promotion of their identity, the provision of adequate education and the
facilitation of their participation in all aspects of the political, economic, social,
religious and cultural life of society and in the economic progress and development
of their country, without discrimination, and to apply a gender perspective while
doing so;
3. Urges States to take, as appropriate, all necessary constitutional,
legislative, administrative and other measures to promote and give effect to the
Declaration, and appeals to States to cooperate bilaterally and multilaterally, in
particular on the exchange of best practices and lessons learned, in accordance with
the Declaration, in order to promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
4. Welcomes in this regard the initiative of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to organize, in cooperation with the
International Labour Organization and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the expert meeting on integration with diversity in policing, held in Vienna
on 15 and 16 January 2008, bringing together police service professionals of
different regions and countries of the world in order to share good experiences and
lessons learned in relation to the inclusion of persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in law enforcement systems, and takes
note of the ongoing work on the elaboration of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights guidelines on integration with diversity in
policing;4
5. Encourages States, in their follow-up to the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to include
aspects relating to persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
__________________
3 See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
4 Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights report on the expert meeting
on integration with diversity in policing: http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/minorities/
seminar.htm.A/63/430/Add.2
111 08-63473
minorities in their national plans of action and, in this context, to take forms of
multiple discrimination fully into account;
6. Commends the independent expert on minority issues for the work that
she has undertaken so far, for the important role that she has played in raising the
level of awareness of and in giving added visibility to the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and for her
ongoing efforts to promote and protect their rights in order to ensure equitable
development and peaceful and stable societies, including through close cooperation
with Governments, the relevant United Nations bodies and mechanisms and
non-governmental organizations, as provided for in Human Rights Council
resolution 7/6;
7. Calls upon all States to cooperate with the independent expert in the
performance of the tasks and duties mandated to her, and encourages the specialized
agencies, regional organizations, national human rights institutions and
non-governmental organizations to develop regular dialogue and cooperation with
the mandate holder;
8. Takes note with appreciation of the decision of the Human Rights
Council to establish the Forum on Minority Issues,5 which shall provide a platform
for promoting dialogue and cooperation on issues pertaining to persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities as well as thematic
contributions and expertise to the work of the independent expert on minority issues
and identify and analyse best practices, challenges, opportunities and initiatives for
the further implementation of the Declaration;
9. Invites States, United Nations mechanisms, bodies, specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, regional, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and national human rights institutions as well as academics and
experts on minority issues to participate actively in the inaugural session of the
Forum on Minority Issues, to be held on 15 and 16 December 2008 in Geneva,
which is dedicated to the subject of the rights of persons belonging to minorities and
the right to education;
10. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
promote, within her mandate, the implementation of the Declaration, to continue to
engage in a dialogue with Governments for that purpose and to regularly update and
disseminate widely the United Nations Guide for Minorities;
11. Welcomes the inter-agency consultation of the High Commissioner with
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes on minority issues, and calls upon
those agencies, funds and programmes to contribute actively to this process;
12. Also welcomes the cooperation of the independent expert on minority
issues with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, such as the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in continuing
their engagement with persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities in their work in all parts of the world;
__________________
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53),
chap. I, resolution 6/15.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 112
13. Requests the High Commissioner to continue her efforts to improve the
coordination and cooperation among United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes on activities related to the promotion and protection of the rights of
persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and to
take the work of relevant regional organizations active in the field of human rights
into account in her endeavours;
14. Invites the human rights treaty bodies when considering reports
submitted by State parties as well as special procedures of the Human Rights
Council to continue to give attention, within their respective mandates, to situations
and rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities;
15. Invites the High Commissioner to continue to seek voluntary
contributions to facilitate the effective participation of representatives of
non-governmental organizations and persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities, in particular those from developing countries, in
minority-related activities organized by the United Nations, particularly its human
rights bodies, and in doing so to give particular attention to ensuring the
participation of young people and women;
16. Invites the independent expert on minority issues to report to the General
Assembly on the implementation of the present resolution at its sixty-fifth session;
17. Decides to continue consideration of the question at its sixty-fifth session
under the item entitled “Human rights questions”.A/63/430/Add.2
113 08-63473
Draft resolution VIII
Human rights and extreme poverty
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,2
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,3 the Convention on the Rights of the Child,4 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,5
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities6 and other human rights
instruments adopted by the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 47/196 of 22 December 1992, by which it declared
17 October the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, and its
resolution 62/205 of 19 December 2007, by which it proclaimed the second United
Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017), as well as its resolution
61/157 of 19 December 2006 and its previous resolutions on human rights and
extreme poverty, in which it reaffirmed that extreme poverty and exclusion from
society constitute a violation of human dignity and that urgent national and
international action is therefore required to eliminate them,
Recalling also its resolution 52/134 of 12 December 1997, in which it
recognized that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
rights was essential for the effective understanding, promotion and protection of all
human rights,
Reaffirming the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals,
Deeply concerned that extreme poverty persists in all countries of the world,
regardless of their economic, social and cultural situation, and that its extent and
manifestations, such as hunger, trafficking in human beings, disease, lack of
adequate shelter, illiteracy and hopelessness, are particularly severe in developing
countries, while acknowledging the significant progress made in several parts of the
world in combating extreme poverty,
Deeply concerned also that gender inequality, violence and discrimination
exacerbate extreme poverty, disproportionally impacting women and girls,
Stressing that special attention should be given to children, persons with
disabilities and indigenous peoples who are living in extreme poverty,
Concerned by the challenges faced today, including those derived from the
food crisis, the energy crisis and the financial crisis, and by their impact on the
increase in the number of people living in extreme poverty and their negative effect
on the capacity of all States, especially developing countries, to fight extreme
poverty,
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
4 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
5 Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
6 Resolution 61/106, annex I.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 114
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 2/2 of 27 November 2006, 7/27
of 28 March 2008 and 8/11 of 18 June 2008, as well as resolution 2006/9 of
24 August 20067 of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights of the Human Rights Council, and taking note of the annex thereto,
containing the draft guiding principles on extreme poverty and human rights: the
rights of the poor,
Welcoming the Summit of World Leaders for Action against Hunger and
Poverty of 20 September 2004, convened in New York by the Presidents of Brazil,
Chile and France and the Prime Minister of Spain with the support of the Secretary-
General,
Recognizing that the eradication of extreme poverty is a major challenge
within the process of globalization and requires coordinated and continued policies
through decisive national action and international cooperation,
Stressing the necessity of better understanding the causes and consequences of
extreme poverty,
Reaffirming that, since the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits
the full and effective enjoyment of human rights and might, in some situations,
constitute a threat to the right to life, its immediate alleviation and eventual
eradication must remain a high priority for the international community,
Stressing that respect for all human rights, which are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, is of crucial importance for all policies and
programmes to fight extreme poverty,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and the full and effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing and contribute to the eradication of extreme poverty,
1. Reaffirms that extreme poverty and exclusion from society constitute a
violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international action is
therefore required to eliminate them;
2. Reaffirms also that it is essential for States to foster participation by the
poorest people in the decision-making process in the societies in which they live, in
the promotion of human rights and in efforts to combat extreme poverty, and that it
is essential for people living in poverty and vulnerable groups to be empowered to
organize themselves and to participate in all aspects of political, economic and
social life, in particular the planning and implementation of policies that affect
them, thus enabling them to become genuine partners in development;
3. Emphasizes that extreme poverty is a major issue to be addressed by
Governments, civil society and the United Nations system, including international
financial institutions, and in this context reaffirms that political commitment is a
prerequisite for the eradication of poverty;
4. Reaffirms that the existence of widespread absolute poverty inhibits the
full and effective enjoyment of human rights and renders democracy and popular
participation fragile;
__________________
7 See A/HRC/Sub.1/58/L.11.A/63/430/Add.2
115 08-63473
5. Recognizes the need to promote respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to address the most pressing social needs of people
living in poverty, including through the design and development of appropriate
mechanisms to strengthen and consolidate democratic institutions and governance;
6. Reaffirms the commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,8 in particular the commitments to spare no effort to fight against
extreme poverty and to achieve development and poverty eradication, including the
commitment to halve, by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income
is less than one United States dollar a day and the proportion of people who suffer
from hunger;
7. Reaffirms also the commitment made at the 2005 World Summit to
eradicate poverty and promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development
and global prosperity for all, including women and girls;9
8. Encourages the international community to strengthen its efforts to
address challenges that are contributing to extreme poverty, including those posed
by the current food, energy and financial crises in all parts of the world, especially
in developing countries, by enhancing its cooperation to help build national
capacities;
9. Reaffirms the critical role of both formal and informal education in the
achievement of poverty eradication and other development goals as envisaged in the
Millennium Declaration, in particular basic education and training for eradicating
illiteracy, and efforts towards expanded secondary and higher education as well as
vocational education and technical training, especially for girls and women, the
creation of human resources and infrastructure capabilities and the empowerment of
those living in poverty, and in this context reaffirms the Dakar Framework for
Action adopted at the World Education Forum in 2000,10 and recognizes the
importance of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
strategy for the eradication of poverty, especially extreme poverty, in supporting the
Education for All programmes as a tool to achieve the millennium development goal
of universal primary education by 2015;
10. Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to give high priority to the question of the relationship between extreme
poverty and human rights, and also invites her to further pursue the work in this
area;
11. Calls upon States, United Nations bodies, in particular the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations
Development Programme, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to continue to give appropriate attention to the links between human
rights and extreme poverty, and encourages the private sector and the international
financial institutions to proceed likewise;
12. Invites States, as well as relevant United Nations agencies, specialized
agencies, programmes and funds, intergovernmental organizations, United Nations
__________________
8 See resolution 55/2.
9 See resolution 60/1.
10 See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26-28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 116
treaty bodies, special procedures, including the independent expert on the question
of human rights and extreme poverty, national human rights institutions, within their
respective mandates, and also non-governmental organizations, especially those in
which people in situations of extreme poverty express their views, to contribute
further to the consultations led by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the draft guiding principles on extreme poverty and human rights:
the rights of the poor;
13. Welcomes the efforts of entities throughout the United Nations system to
incorporate the Millennium Declaration and the internationally agreed development
goals set out therein into their work;
14. Welcomes the appointment of the new independent expert on the question
of human rights and extreme poverty and the renewed mandate that she has
received, and takes note with appreciation of her report to the General Assembly;11
15. Decides to consider the question further at its sixty-fifth session under
the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”.
__________________
11 A/63/274.A/63/430/Add.2
117 08-63473
Draft resolution IX
Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all
human rights
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
and expressing, in particular, the need to achieve international cooperation in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 as well as the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June 1993,2
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,3
Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration4 and the outcome
documents of the twenty-third5 and twenty-fourth6 special sessions of the General
Assembly, held in New York from 5 to 10 June 2000 and in Geneva from 26 June to
1 July 2000, respectively,
Recalling also its resolution 62/151 of 18 December 2007,
Recalling further Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/17 of
14 April 2005 on globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human
rights,7
Recognizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated and that the international community must treat human rights
globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same
emphasis,
Realizing that globalization affects all countries differently and makes them
more exposed to external developments, positive as well as negative, inter alia, in
the field of human rights,
Realizing also that globalization is not merely an economic process, but that it
also has social, political, environmental, cultural and legal dimensions, which have
an impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Emphasizing the need to fully implement the global partnership for
development and enhance the momentum generated by the 2005 World Summit in
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4 See resolution 55/2.
5 Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
6 Resolution S-24/2, annex.
7 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and
corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 118
order to operationalize and implement the commitments made in the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits, including the 2005 World
Summit, in the economic, social and related fields, and reaffirming in particular the
commitment contained in paragraphs 19 and 47 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome8 to promote fair globalization and the development of the productive
sectors in developing countries to enable them to participate more effectively in and
benefit from the process of globalization,
Realizing the need to undertake a thorough, independent and comprehensive
assessment of the social, environmental and cultural impact of globalization on
societies,
Recognizing in each culture a dignity and value that deserve recognition,
respect and preservation, convinced that, in their rich variety and diversity and in
the reciprocal influences that they exert on one another, all cultures form part of the
common heritage belonging to all humankind, and aware that the risk of a global
monoculture poses more of a threat if the developing world remains poor and
marginalized,
Recognizing also that multilateral mechanisms have a unique role to play in
meeting the challenges and opportunities presented by globalization,
Emphasizing the global character of the migratory phenomenon, the
importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation and the need to
protect the human rights of migrants, particularly at a time in which migration flows
have increased in the globalized economy,
Expressing concern at the negative impact of international financial turbulence
on social and economic development and on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
particularly in the light of the current international financial challenges,
Expressing deep concern at the negative impact of the rising global food and
energy challenges on social and economic development and on the full enjoyment of
all human rights,
Recognizing that globalization should be guided by the fundamental principles
that underpin the corpus of human rights, such as equity, participation,
accountability, non-discrimination at both the national and the international levels,
respect for diversity, tolerance and international cooperation and solidarity,
Emphasizing that the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the full
and effective enjoyment of human rights, and that its immediate alleviation and
eventual elimination must remain a high priority for the international community,
Strongly reiterating the determination to ensure the timely and full realization
of the development goals and objectives agreed at the major United Nations
conferences and summits, including those agreed at the Millennium Summit that are
described as the Millennium Development Goals, which have helped to galvanize
efforts towards poverty eradication,
Deeply concerned at the inadequacy of measures to narrow the widening gap
between the developed and the developing countries, and within countries, which
__________________
8 See resolution 60/1.A/63/430/Add.2
119 08-63473
has contributed, inter alia, to deepening poverty and has adversely affected the full
enjoyment of all human rights, in particular in developing countries,
Noting that human beings strive for a world that is respectful of human rights
and cultural diversity and that, in this regard, they work to ensure that all activities,
including those affected by globalization, are consistent with those aims,
1. Recognizes that, while globalization, by its impact on, inter alia, the role
of the State, may affect human rights, the promotion and protection of all human
rights is first and foremost the responsibility of the State;
2. Emphasizes that development should be at the centre of the international
economic agenda and that coherence between national development strategies and
international obligations and commitments is imperative for an enabling
environment for development and an inclusive and equitable globalization;
3. Reaffirms that narrowing the gap between rich and poor, both within and
between countries, is an explicit goal at the national and international levels, as part
of the effort to create an enabling environment for the full enjoyment of all human
rights;
4. Also reaffirms the commitment to create an environment at both the
national and the global levels that is conducive to development and to the
elimination of poverty through, inter alia, good governance within each country and
at the international level, transparency in the financial, monetary and trading
systems and commitment to an open, equitable, rule-based, predictable and non-
discriminatory multilateral trading and financial system;
5. Recognizes that, while globalization offers great opportunities, the fact
that its benefits are very unevenly shared and its costs unevenly distributed
represents an aspect of the process that affects the full enjoyment of all human
rights, in particular in developing countries;
6. Welcomes the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of human
rights,9 which focuses on the liberalization of agricultural trade and its impact on
the realization of the right to development, including the right to food, and takes
note of the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
7. Calls upon Member States, relevant agencies of the United Nations
system, intergovernmental organizations and civil society to promote equitable and
environmentally sustainable economic growth for managing globalization so that
poverty is systematically reduced and the international development targets are
achieved;
8. Recognizes that only through broad and sustained efforts, including
policies and measures at the global level to create a shared future based upon our
common humanity in all its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and
equitable and have a human face, thus contributing to the full enjoyment of all
human rights;
__________________
9 E/CN.4/2002/54.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 120
9. Underlines the urgent need to establish an equitable, transparent and
democratic international system to strengthen and broaden the participation of
developing countries in international economic decision-making and norm-setting;
10. Affirms that globalization is a complex process of structural
transformation, with numerous interdisciplinary aspects, which has an impact on the
enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right
to development;
11. Also affirms that the international community should strive to respond to
the challenges and opportunities posed by globalization in a manner that ensures
respect for the cultural diversity of all;
12. Underlines, therefore, the need to continue to analyse the consequences
of globalization for the full enjoyment of all human rights;
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,10 and requests him to
seek further the views of Member States and relevant agencies of the United Nations
system and to submit a substantive report on the subject to the General Assembly at
its sixty-fourth session.
__________________
10 A/63/259.A/63/430/Add.2
121 08-63473
Draft resolution X
Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in
Central Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/105 of 4 December 2000 concerning regional
arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling also its resolutions 55/34 B of 20 November 2000 and 55/233 of
23 December 2000, section III of its resolution 55/234 of 23 December 2000,
resolution 56/253 of 24 December 2001, and its resolutions 58/176 of 22 December
2003, 59/183 of 20 December 2004, 60/151 of 16 December 2005, 61/158 of
19 December 2006 and 62/221 of 22 December 2007 on the Subregional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa,
Recalling further that the World Conference on Human Rights recommended
that more resources be made available for the strengthening of regional
arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights under the
programme of technical cooperation in the field of human rights of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,1
Recalling the report of the High Commissioner,2
Taking note of the holding of the twenty-seventh ministerial meeting of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, in Luanda from 13 to 15 May 2008,
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General,3
Welcoming the 2005 World Summit Outcome,4 in particular the decision
confirmed therein to double the regular budget of the Office of the High
Commissioner over the next five years,
1. Welcomes the activities of the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and
Democracy in Central Africa at Yaoundé;
2. Notes with satisfaction the support provided for the establishment of the
Centre by the host country;
3. Takes note of the implementation of the new three-year strategy for the
Centre, which aims to reinforce its activities;5
4. Notes the efforts of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly6 in order to provide sufficient funds and human
resources for the Centre’s missions;
__________________
1 See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 36, addendum
(A/56/36/Add.1).
3 A/63/367.
4 See resolution 60/1.
5 See A/62/317, paras. 14-19.
6 See resolutions 61/158 and 62/221.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 122
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner to continue
to provide additional funds and human resources within the existing resources of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to enable the
Centre to respond positively and effectively to the growing needs in the promotion
and protection of human rights and in developing a culture of democracy and the
rule of law in the Central African subregion;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.A/63/430/Add.2
123 08-63473
Draft resolution XI
The right to development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses, in particular,
the determination to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom, as well as to employ international mechanisms for the promotion of the
economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 as well as the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,2
Recalling also the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic and social fields,
Recalling further that the Declaration on the Right to Development, adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986, confirmed
that the right to development is an inalienable human right and that equality of
opportunity for development is a prerogative both of nations and of individuals who
make up nations, and that the individual is the central subject and beneficiary of
development,
Stressing that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action3 reaffirmed
the right to development as a universal and inalienable right and an integral part of
fundamental human rights, and the individual as the central subject and beneficiary
of development,
Reaffirming the objective of making the right to development a reality for
everyone, as set out in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by the
General Assembly on 8 September 2000,4
Deeply concerned that the majority of indigenous peoples in the world live in
conditions of poverty, and recognizing the critical need to address the negative
impact of poverty and inequity on indigenous peoples by ensuring their full and
effective inclusion in development and poverty eradication programmes,
Reaffirming the universality, indivisibility, interrelatedness, interdependence
and mutually reinforcing nature of all civil, cultural, economic, political and social
rights, including the right to development,
Expressing deep concern over the lack of progress in the trade negotiations of
the World Trade Organization, and reaffirming the need for a successful outcome of
the Doha Development Round in key areas such as agriculture, market access for
non-agricultural products, trade facilitation, development and services,
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
4 See resolution 55/2.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 124
Recalling the outcome of the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, held in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008 on the theme
“Addressing the opportunities and challenges of globalization for development”,5
Recalling also all its previous resolutions, Human Rights Council
resolution 9/3 of 24 September 2008,6 previous resolutions of the Council and those
of the Commission on Human Rights on the right to development, in particular
Commission resolution 1998/72 of 22 April 1998,7 on the urgent need to make
further progress towards the realization of the right to development as set out in the
Declaration on the Right to Development,
Welcoming the outcome of the ninth session of the Working Group on the
Right to Development of the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva from 18 to
22 August 2008, as contained in the report of the Working Group8 and as referred to
in the report of the Secretary-General on the right to development,9
Recalling the Fourteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-
Aligned Countries, held in Havana on 15 and 16 September 2006, the Fifteenth
Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in Tehran on 29 and 30 July 2008, and the Ministerial Meeting of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Putrajaya, Malaysia, on 29 and 30 May 2006,
Reiterating its continuing support for the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development10 as a development framework for Africa,
Recognizing that poverty is an affront to human dignity,
Recognizing also that extreme poverty and hunger are the greatest global threat
that requires the collective commitment of the international community for its
eradication, pursuant to Millennium Development Goal 1, and therefore calling
upon the international community, including the Human Rights Council, to
contribute towards achieving that goal,
Recognizing further that historical injustices have undeniably contributed to
the poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization, social exclusion, economic
disparity, instability and insecurity that affect many people in different parts of the
world, in particular in developing countries,
Stressing that poverty eradication is one of the critical elements in the
promotion and realization of the right to development and that poverty is a
multifaceted problem that requires a multifaceted and integrated approach in
addressing economic, political, social, environmental and institutional dimensions at
all levels, especially in the context of the Millennium Development Goal of halving,
by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income is less than one dollar a
day and the proportion of people who suffer from hunger,
__________________
5 See TD/442.
6 See A/HRC/9/L.11, sect. A.
7 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23),
chap. II, sect. A.
8 A/HRC/9/17.
9 A/63/340.
10 A/57/304, annex.A/63/430/Add.2
125 08-63473
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations adopted by consensus by
the Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human Rights Council at its
ninth session,8
and calls for their immediate, full and effective implementation by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
relevant actors;
2. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Working Group as renewed
by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 9/3,6
with the recognition that the
Working Group will convene annual sessions of five working days and present its
reports to the Council;
3. Also supports the realization of the mandate of the high-level task force
on the implementation of the right to development, established within the
framework of the Working Group, as renewed by the Human Rights Council in its
resolution 9/3, with the further recognition that the task force will convene annual
sessions of seven working days and present its reports to the Working Group;
4. Emphasizes the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution
60/251 of 15 March 2006 establishing the Human Rights Council, and in this regard
calls upon the Council to implement the agreement to continue to act to ensure that
its agenda promotes and advances sustainable development and the achievements of
the Millennium Development Goals, and also in this regard, to lead to raising the
right to development, as set out in paragraphs 5 and 10 of the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action,3
to the same level and on a par with all other human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Notes with appreciation that the high-level task force, at its second
meeting, examined Millennium Development Goal 8, on developing a global
partnership for development, and suggested criteria for its periodic evaluation with
the aim of improving the effectiveness of global partnership with regard to the
realization of the right to development;11
6. Stresses the importance of endorsement of the workplan for the task force
for the period 2008-2010, outlined in paragraph 43 of the report of the Working
Group,8
which requires that the criteria for the periodic evaluation of global
partnerships, as identified in Millennium Development Goal 8, to be submitted by
the task force to the Working Group at its eleventh session in 2010, is extended to
other components of Millennium Development Goal 8;
7. Also stresses that the above criteria, once considered, revised and
endorsed by the Working Group, should be used, as appropriate, in the elaboration
of a comprehensive and coherent set of standards for the implementation of the right
to development;
8. Emphasizes the importance that, upon completion of the three phases of
the road map, the Working Group take appropriate steps to ensure respect for and
practical application of these standards, which could take various forms, including
guidelines on the implementation of the right to development, and evolve into a
basis for consideration of an international legal standard of a binding nature,
through a collaborative process of engagement;
__________________
11 See E/CN.4/2005/WG.18/TF/3.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 126
9. Stresses the importance of the core principles contained in the
conclusions of the Working Group at its third session,12 congruent with the purpose
of international human rights instruments, such as equality, non-discrimination,
accountability, participation and international cooperation, as critical to
mainstreaming the right to development at the national and international levels, and
underlines the importance of the principles of equity and transparency;
10. Also stresses that it is important that the high-level task force and the
Working Group, in the discharge of their mandates, take into account the need:
(a) To promote the democratization of the system of international
governance in order to increase the effective participation of developing countries in
international decision-making;
(b) To also promote effective partnerships such as the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development10
and other similar initiatives with the developing countries,
particularly the least developed countries, for the purpose of the realization of their
right to development, including the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals;
(c) To strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization of the
right to development at the international level, while urging all States to undertake
at the national level the necessary policy formulation and to institute the measures
required for the implementation of the right to development as an integral part of
fundamental human rights, and also urging all States to expand and deepen mutually
beneficial cooperation in ensuring development and eliminating obstacles to
development in the context of promoting effective international cooperation for the
realization of the right to development, bearing in mind that lasting progress
towards the implementation of the right to development requires effective
development policies at the national level and a favourable economic environment
at the international level;
(d) To consider ways and means to continue to ensure the operationalization
of the right to development as a priority;
(e) To mainstream the right to development in the policies and operational
activities of the United Nations and the specialized agencies, programmes and
funds, as well as in policies and strategies of the international financial and
multilateral trading systems, taking into account in this regard that the core
principles of the international economic, commercial and financial spheres, such as
equity, non-discrimination, transparency, accountability, participation and
international cooperation, including effective partnerships for development, are
indispensable in achieving the right to development and preventing discriminatory
treatment arising out of political or other non-economic considerations, in
addressing the issues of concern to the developing countries;
11. Encourages the Human Rights Council to consider how to ensure follow-
up to the ongoing work of the former Subcommission on the Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights on the right to development, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of General Assembly and Commission on Human Rights
resolutions, and in compliance with decisions to be taken by the Human Rights
Council;
__________________
12 E/CN.4/2002/28/Rev.1, sect. VIII.A.A/63/430/Add.2
127 08-63473
12. Invites Member States and all other stakeholders to participate actively in
future sessions of the Social Forum, while recognizing the strong support extended
to the Forum at its previous four sessions by the Subcommission on the Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights;
13. Reaffirms the commitment to implement the goals and targets set out in
all the outcome documents of the major United Nations conferences and summits
and their review processes, in particular those relating to the realization of the right
to development, recognizing that the realization of the right to development is
critical to achieving the objectives, goals and targets set in those outcome
documents;
14. Also reaffirms that the realization of the right to development is essential
to the implementation of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, which
regards all human rights as universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
places the human person at the centre of development and recognizes that, while
development facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, the lack of development
may not be invoked to justify the abridgement of internationally recognized human
rights;
15. Stresses that the primary responsibility for the promotion and protection
of all human rights lies with the State, and reaffirms that States have the primary
responsibility for their own economic and social development and that the role of
national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized;
16. Reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to create national and
international conditions favourable to the realization of the right to development, as
well as their commitment to cooperate with each other to that end;
17. Also reaffirms the need for an international environment that is
conducive to the realization of the right to development;
18. Stresses the need to strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and
realization of the right to development at the international and national levels, and
calls upon States to institute the measures required for the implementation of the
right to development as an integral part of fundamental human rights;
19. Emphasizes the critical importance of identifying and analysing obstacles
impeding the full realization of the right to development at both the national and the
international levels;
20. Affirms that, while globalization offers both opportunities and challenges,
the process of globalization remains deficient in achieving the objectives of
integrating all countries into a globalized world, and stresses the need for policies
and measures at the national and global levels to respond to the challenges and
opportunities of globalization if this process is to be made fully inclusive and
equitable;
21. Recognizes that, despite continuous efforts on the part of the
international community, the gap between developed and developing countries
remains unacceptably wide, that most of the developing countries continue to face
difficulties in participating in the globalization process and that many risk being
marginalized and effectively excluded from its benefits;A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 128
22. Expresses its deep concern in this regard at the negative impact on the
realization of the right to development owing to the further aggravation of the
economic and social situation, in particular of developing countries, as the result of
the ongoing international energy, food and financial crises;
23. Underlines the fact that the international community is far from meeting
the target set in the United Nations Millennium Declaration4
of halving the number
of people living in poverty by 2015, reaffirms the commitment made to meet that
target, and emphasizes the principle of international cooperation, including
partnership and commitment, between developed and developing countries towards
achieving the goal;
24. Urges developed countries that have not yet done so to make concrete
efforts towards meeting the targets of 0.7 per cent of their gross national product for
official development assistance to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.2 per cent of
their gross national product to least developed countries, and encourages developing
countries to build on the progress achieved in ensuring that official development
assistance is used effectively to help to meet development goals and targets;
25. Recognizes the need to address market access for developing countries,
including in agriculture, services and non-agricultural products, in particular those
of interest to developing countries;
26. Calls for the implementation of a desirable pace of meaningful trade
liberalization, including in areas under negotiation in the World Trade Organization;
implementation of commitments on implementation-related issues and concerns;
review of special and differential treatment provisions, with a view to strengthening
them and making them more precise, effective and operational; avoidance of new
forms of protectionism; and capacity-building and technical assistance for
developing countries as important issues in making progress towards the effective
implementation of the right to development;
27. Recognizes the important link between the international economic,
commercial and financial spheres and the realization of the right to development,
stresses, in this regard, the need for good governance and broadening the base of
decision-making at the international level on issues of development concern and the
need to fill organizational gaps, as well as strengthen the United Nations system and
other multilateral institutions, and also stresses the need to broaden and strengthen
the participation of developing countries and countries with economies in transition
in international economic decision-making and norm-setting;
28. Also recognizes that good governance and the rule of law at the national
level assist all States in the promotion and protection of human rights, including the
right to development, and agrees on the value of the ongoing efforts being made by
States to identify and strengthen good governance practices, including transparent,
responsible, accountable and participatory government, that are responsive and
appropriate to their needs and aspirations, including in the context of agreed
partnership approaches to development, capacity-building and technical assistance;
29. Further recognizes the important role and the rights of women and the
application of a gender perspective as a cross-cutting issue in the process of
realizing the right to development, and notes in particular the positive relationship
between women’s education and their equal participation in the civil, cultural,A/63/430/Add.2
129 08-63473
economic, political and social activities of the community and the promotion of the
right to development;
30. Stresses the need for the integration of the rights of children, girls and
boys alike, in all policies and programmes, and for ensuring the promotion and
protection of those rights, especially in areas relating to health, education and the
full development of their capacities;
31. Welcomes the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS adopted at the High-
level Meeting of the General Assembly on 2 June 2006,13 stresses that further and
additional measures must be taken at the national and international levels to fight
HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases, taking into account ongoing efforts
and programmes, and reiterates the need for international assistance in this regard;
32. Also welcomes the entry into force of the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities14 on 3 May 2008;
33. Stresses its commitment to indigenous peoples in the process of
realization of the right to development, and reaffirms the commitment to promote
their rights in the areas of education, employment, vocational training and
retraining, housing, sanitation, health and social security in accordance with
recognized international human rights obligations and taking into account, as
appropriate, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 61/295 of 13 September 2007;
34. Recognizes the need for strong partnerships with civil society
organizations and the private sector in pursuit of poverty eradication and
development, as well as for corporate social responsibility;
35. Emphasizes the urgent need for taking concrete and effective measures to
prevent, combat and criminalize all forms of corruption at all levels, to prevent,
detect and deter in a more effective manner international transfers of illicitly
acquired assets and to strengthen international cooperation in asset recovery
consistent with the principles of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption,15 particularly chapter V thereof, stresses the importance of a genuine
political commitment on the part of all Governments through a firm legal
framework, and in this context urges States to sign and ratify as soon as possible,
and States parties to implement effectively, the Convention;
36. Also emphasizes the need to strengthen further the activities of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the promotion and
realization of the right to development, including ensuring effective use of the
financial and human resources necessary to fulfil its mandate, and calls upon the
Secretary-General to provide the Office of the High Commissioner with the
necessary resources;
37. Reaffirms the request to the High Commissioner, in mainstreaming the
right to development, to undertake effectively activities aimed at strengthening the
global partnership for development between Member States, development agencies
and the international development, financial and trade institutions, and to reflect
those activities in detail in her next report to the Human Rights Council;
__________________
13 Resolution 60/262, annex.
14 Resolution 61/106, annex I.
15 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 130
38. Calls upon the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as well
as the specialized agencies, to mainstream the right to development in their
operational programmes and objectives, and stresses the need for the international
financial and multilateral trading systems to mainstream the right to development in
their policies and objectives;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of Member States, United Nations organs and bodies, specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, international development and financial institutions, in
particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and non-governmental organizations;
40. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session and an interim report to the Human Rights
Council on the implementation of the present resolution, including efforts
undertaken at the national, regional and international levels in the promotion and
realization of the right to development, and invites the Chairperson of the Working
Group on the Right to Development to present a verbal update to the Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session.A/63/430/Add.2
131 08-63473
Draft resolution XII
Human rights and unilateral coercive measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on this subject, the most recent of which
was resolution 62/162 of 18 December 2007, Human Rights Council resolution 9/4
of 24 September 2008,1 and previous resolutions of the Council and the
Commission on Human Rights,
Reaffirming the pertinent principles and provisions contained in the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States proclaimed by the General Assembly in its
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, in particular article 32 thereof, in
which it declared that no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political
or any other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the
subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General2 submitted pursuant to
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1999/21 of 23 April 1999,3 and the reports
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions 52/120 of
12 December 19974 and 55/110 of 4 December 2000,5
Stressing that unilateral coercive measures and legislation are contrary to
international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations among States,
Recognizing the universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated
character of all human rights, and in this regard reaffirming the right to development
as an integral part of all human rights,
Recalling the final document of the Fourteenth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana on 15 and 16 September
2006,6 and the final document of the Fifteenth Ministerial Conference of the Non-
Aligned Movement, held in Teheran from 27 to 30 July 2008,7 in which the
Ministers of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries agreed to oppose and
condemn those measures or laws and their continued application, persevere with
efforts to effectively reverse them and urge other States to do likewise, as called for
by the General Assembly and other United Nations organs, and to request States
applying those measures or laws to revoke them fully and immediately,
Recalling also that at the World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna
from 14 to 25 June 1993, States were called upon to refrain from any unilateral
coercive measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter that
__________________
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/63/53
and Add.1), chap. I.
2 A/63/272.
3 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23),
chap. II, sect. A.
4 A/53/293 and Add.1.
5 A/56/207 and Add.1.
6 A/61/472-S/2006/780, annex I.
7 A/62/929, annex I.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 132
creates obstacles to trade relations among States and impedes the full realization of
all human rights, and also severely threatens the freedom of trade,8
Bearing in mind all the references to this question in the Copenhagen
Declaration on Social Development adopted by the World Summit for Social
Development on 12 March 1995,9 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women on 15 September 1995,10 the
Istanbul Declaration on Human Settlements and the Habitat Agenda adopted by the
second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) on 14 June
1996,11 and their five-year reviews,
Expressing its concern about the negative impact of unilateral coercive
measures on international relations, trade, investment and cooperation,
Expressing its grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children
is adversely affected by unilateral coercive measures not in accordance with
international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade relations among
States, impede the full realization of social and economic development and hinder
the well-being of the population in the affected countries, with particular
consequences for women and children, including adolescents,
Deeply concerned that, despite the recommendations adopted on this question
by the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the Commission on Human
Rights and recent major United Nations conferences, and contrary to general
international law and the Charter, unilateral coercive measures continue to be
promulgated and implemented with all their negative implications for the social
humanitarian activities and economic and social development of developing
countries, including their extraterritorial effects, thereby creating additional
obstacles to the full enjoyment of all human rights by peoples and individuals under
the jurisdiction of other States,
Bearing in mind all the extraterritorial effects of any unilateral legislative,
administrative and economic measures, policies and practices of a coercive nature
against the development process and the enhancement of human rights in
developing countries, which create obstacles to the full realization of all human
rights,
Reaffirming that unilateral coercive measures are a major obstacle to the
implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,12
Recalling article 1, paragraph 2, common to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights13
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,13 which provides, inter alia, that in no case may a people be
deprived of its own means of subsistence,
__________________
8 See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
9 Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
10 Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
11 Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3-14 June
1996 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
12 Resolution 41/128, annex.
13 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.A/63/430/Add.2
133 08-63473
Noting the continuing efforts of the open-ended Working Group on the Right
to Development of the Human Rights Council, and reaffirming in particular its
criteria, according to which unilateral coercive measures are one of the obstacles to
the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,
1. Urges all States to stop adopting or implementing any unilateral
measures not in accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations among States, in
particular those of a coercive nature with all their extraterritorial effects, which
create obstacles to trade relations among States, thus impeding the full realization of
the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights14 and other
international human rights instruments, in particular the right of individuals and
peoples to development;
2. Also urges all States not to adopt any unilateral measures not in
accordance with international law and the Charter that impede the full achievement
of economic and social development by the population of the affected countries, in
particular children and women, that hinder their well-being and that create obstacles
to the full enjoyment of their human rights, including the right of everyone to a
standard of living adequate for his or her health and well-being and his or her right
to food, medical care and the necessary social services, as well as to ensure that
food and medicine are not used as tools for political pressure;
3. Strongly objects to the extraterritorial nature of those measures which, in
addition, threaten the sovereignty of States, and in this context calls upon all
Member States to neither recognize those measures nor to apply them, as well as to
take administrative or legislative measures, as appropriate, to counteract the
extraterritorial applications or effects of unilateral coercive measures;
4. Condemns the continued unilateral application and enforcement by
certain Powers of unilateral coercive measures, and rejects those measures with all
their extraterritorial effects as being tools for political or economic pressure against
any country, in particular against developing countries, adopted with a view to
preventing those countries from exercising their right to decide, of their own free
will, their own political, economic and social systems, and because of the negative
effects of those measures on the realization of all the human rights of vast sectors of
their populations, in particular children, women and the elderly;
5. Reaffirms that essential goods such as food and medicines should not be
used as tools for political coercion and that under no circumstances should people
be deprived of their own means of subsistence and development;
6. Calls upon Member States that have initiated such measures to abide by
the principles of international law, the Charter, the declarations of the United
Nations and world conferences and relevant resolutions and to commit themselves
to their obligations and responsibilities arising from the international human rights
instruments to which they are party by revoking such measures at the earliest
possible time;
7. Reaffirms, in this context, the right of all peoples to self-determination,
by virtue of which they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development;
__________________
14 Resolution 217 A (III).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 134
8. Recalls that, according to the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, and the relevant principles and
provisions contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
proclaimed by the Assembly in its resolution 3281 (XXIX), in particular article 32
thereof, no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other
type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination
of the exercise of its sovereign rights and to secure from it advantages of any kind;
9. Rejects all attempts to introduce unilateral coercive measures, and urges
the Human Rights Council to take fully into account the negative impact of those
measures, including through the enactment of national laws and their extraterritorial
application which are not in conformity with international law, in its task concerning
the implementation of the right to development;
10. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
discharging her functions relating to the promotion, realization and protection of the
right to development and bearing in mind the continuing impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the population of developing countries, to give priority to the
present resolution in her annual report to the General Assembly;
11. Underlines that unilateral coercive measures are one of the major
obstacles to the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,12
and in this regard calls upon all States to avoid the unilateral imposition of
economic coercive measures and the extraterritorial application of domestic laws
which run counter to the principles of free trade and hamper the development of
developing countries, as recognized by the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on
the Right to Development;
12. Recognizes that in the Declaration of Principles adopted at the first phase
of the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Geneva from 10 to
12 December 2003,15 States were strongly urged to avoid and refrain from any
unilateral measure in building the information society;
13. Supports the invitation of the Human Rights Council to all special
rapporteurs and existing thematic mechanisms of the Council in the field of
economic, social and cultural rights to pay due attention, within the scope of their
respective mandates, to the negative impact and consequences of unilateral coercive
measures;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of all Member States, to continue to collect their views and information on
the implications and negative effects of unilateral coercive measures on their
populations and to submit an analytical report thereon to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session, while reiterating once again the need to highlight the practical
and preventive measures in this respect;
15. Decides to examine the question on a priority basis at its sixty-fourth
session under the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms”.
__________________
15 A/C.2/59/3, annex, chap. I, sect. A.A/63/430/Add.2
135 08-63473
Draft resolution XIII
Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to promoting international cooperation, as set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations, in particular Article 1, paragraph 3, as
well as relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,1 for
enhancing genuine cooperation among Member States in the field of human rights,
Recalling its adoption of the United Nations Millennium Declaration on
8 September 20002 and of its resolution 62/160 of 18 December 2007, Human
Rights Council resolution 7/3 of 27 March 2008 and resolutions of the Commission
on Human Rights on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights,
Recalling also the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held at Durban, South Africa, from 31 August
to 8 September 2001, and its role in the enhancement of international cooperation in
the field of human rights,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights is essential for the full achievement of the purposes of the United
Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all human rights,
Recognizing also that the promotion and protection of human rights should be
based on the principle of cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at
strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their human rights
obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations in the
field of human rights could contribute greatly to the enhancement of international
cooperation in this field,
Emphasizing the need for further progress in the promotion and
encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter
alia, international cooperation,
Underlining the fact that mutual understanding, dialogue, cooperation,
transparency and confidence-building are important elements in all activities for the
promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling the adoption of resolution 2000/22 of 18 August 2000, on the
promotion of dialogue on human rights issues, by the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights at its fifty-second session,3
1. Reaffirms that it is one of the purposes of the United Nations and the
responsibility of all Member States to promote, protect and encourage respect for
__________________
1 A/CONF.15/24 (Part I), chap. III.
2 See resolution 55/2.
3 See E/CN.4/2001/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/46, chap. II, sect. A.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 136
human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia, international
cooperation;
2. Recognizes that, in addition to their separate responsibilities to their
individual societies, States have a collective responsibility to uphold the principles
of human dignity, equality and equity at the global level;
3. Reaffirms that dialogue among cultures and civilizations facilitates the
promotion of a culture of tolerance and respect for diversity, and welcomes in this
regard the holding of conferences and meetings at the national, regional and
international levels on dialogue among civilizations;
4. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order
based on inclusion, justice, equality and equity, human dignity, mutual
understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and universal
human rights, and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
5. Reaffirms the importance of the enhancement of international
cooperation for the promotion and protection of human rights and for the
achievement of the objectives of the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance;
6. Considers that international cooperation in the field of human rights, in
conformity with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, should make an effective and practical contribution to
the urgent task of preventing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
7. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms should be guided by the principles of universality,
non-selectivity, objectivity and transparency, in a manner consistent with the
purposes and principles set out in the Charter;
8. Calls upon Member States, specialized agencies and intergovernmental
organizations to continue to carry out a constructive dialogue and consultations for
the enhancement of understanding and the promotion and protection of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and encourages non-governmental organizations
to contribute actively to this endeavour;
9. Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and
procedures to continue to pay attention to the importance of mutual cooperation,
understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and protection of all human
rights;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, to consult States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations on ways and means to enhance international
cooperation and dialogue in the United Nations human rights machinery, including
the Human Rights Council;
11. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its sixty-fourth
session.A/63/430/Add.2
137 08-63473
Draft resolution XIV
Elimination of all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based
on religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it proclaimed
the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling also article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,1 article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights2 and other
relevant human rights provisions,
Recalling further its previous resolutions on the elimination of all forms of
intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief, including resolution
62/157 of 18 December 2007, as well as Human Rights Council resolution 6/37 of
14 December 2007,3 in which the Council, inter alia, extended the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief,4
Reaffirming the recognition by the 1993 World Conference on Human Rights
that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated, and
its call upon all Governments to take all appropriate measures in compliance with
their international obligations and with due regard to their respective legal systems
to counter intolerance and related violence based on religion or belief, including
practices of discrimination against women and the desecration of religious sites,
recognizing that every individual has the right to freedom of thought, conscience,
expression and religion,5
Considering that religion or belief, for those who profess either, is one of the
fundamental elements in their conception of life and that freedom of religion or
belief should be fully respected and guaranteed,
Considering also that the disregard for and infringement of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, in particular the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion or belief, have brought, directly or indirectly, wars and great suffering to
humankind,
Recognizing the important work carried out by the Human Rights Committee
in providing guidance with respect to the scope of the freedom of religion or belief,
Resolved to speed up the implementation of the Declaration on the Elimination
of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Believing that further intensified efforts are therefore required to promote and
protect the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief and to
eliminate all forms of hatred, intolerance and discrimination based on religion or
__________________
1 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
2 Resolution 217 A (III).
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53),
chap. I, sect. A.
4 Ibid., para. 18.
5 See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, para. 22.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 138
belief, as also noted at the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,
Reaffirming that everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience,
religion or belief, which includes the freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief
of one’s choice and the freedom, either alone or in community with others and in
public or private, to manifest one’s religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship
and observance,
Seriously concerned at all attacks on religious places, sites and shrines in
violation of international law, in particular human rights and humanitarian law,
including any deliberate destruction of relics and monuments,
Seriously concerned also at any misuse of registration procedures and at the
resort to discriminatory registration procedures as a means to limit the right to
freedom of religion or belief of members of certain religious communities, at the
limitations placed on religious materials and at the obstacles placed in the way of
construction of places of worship inconsistent with the exercise of the right to
freedom of religion or belief,
Noting that a formal or legal distinction at national level between different
kinds of religions or beliefs may, in some cases, constitute discrimination and may
impinge on the enjoyment of the freedom of religion or belief,
Expressing deep concern at all forms of discrimination and intolerance,
including prejudices against persons and derogatory stereotyping of persons, based
on religion or belief,
Recognizing the importance of enhanced interreligious and intrareligious
dialogue in promoting tolerance in matters relating to religion or belief, and
welcoming different initiatives in this regard, including the Alliance of Civilizations
and the programmes led by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Emphasizing that States, regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important role to play in
promoting tolerance, respect for religious and cultural diversity and in the universal
promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of religion or belief,
Convinced of the need to address the rise in various parts of the world of
religious extremism that affects the rights of individuals, the situations of violence
and discrimination that affect many women as well as other individuals on the
grounds or in the name of religion or belief or in accordance with cultural and
traditional practices, and the misuse of religion or belief for ends inconsistent with
the Charter of the United Nations, as well as other relevant instruments of the
United Nations,
Underlining the importance of education in the promotion of tolerance, which
involves the acceptance by the public of, and its respect for, diversity, including
with regard to religious expression, and underlining also the fact that education, in
particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful way to promoting tolerance
and the elimination of discrimination based on religion or belief,
Reaffirming, in this regard, that education shall be directed to the full
development of the human personality and to the strengthening of respect for humanA/63/430/Add.2
139 08-63473
rights and fundamental freedoms and shall promote understanding, tolerance and
friendship among all nations, racial or religious groups and further the activities of
the United Nations for the maintenance of peace,
1. Condemns all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on
religion or belief, as well as violations of freedom of thought, conscience and
religion or belief;
2. Stresses that the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion
applies equally to all people, regardless of their religions or beliefs, and without any
discrimination as to their equal protection by the law;
3. Emphasizes that, as underlined by the Human Rights Committee,
restrictions on the freedom to manifest one’s religion or belief are permitted only if
limitations are prescribed by law, are necessary to protect public safety, order, health
or morals, or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others, are non-discriminatory
and are applied in a manner that does not vitiate the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion;
4. Recognizes with deep concern the overall rise in instances of intolerance
and violence directed against members of many religious and other communities in
various parts of the world, including cases motivated by Islamophobia, anti-
Semitism and Christianophobia;
5. Expresses concern over the persistence of institutionalized social
intolerance and discrimination practised against many in the name of religion or
belief;
6. Recalls that legal procedures pertaining to religious or belief-based
groups and places of worship are not a prerequisite for the exercise of the right to
manifest one’s religion or belief;
7. Emphasizes that such procedures, as described in paragraph 6 above, at
the national or local level, as and when legally required, should be
non-discriminatory in order to contribute to the effective protection of the right of
all persons to practise their religion or belief either individually or in community
with others and in public or private;
8. Recognizes with concern the situation of persons in vulnerable situations,
including persons deprived of their liberty, refugees, asylum-seekers and internally
displaced persons, children, persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities and migrants, as regards their ability to freely exercise their
right to freedom of religion or belief;
9. Urges States to step up their efforts to protect and promote freedom of
thought, conscience, religion or belief, and to this end:
(a) To ensure that their constitutional and legislative systems provide
adequate and effective guarantees of freedom of thought, conscience, religion and
belief to all without distinction, inter alia, by the provision of effective remedies in
cases where the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief, or the
right to practise freely one’s religion, including the right to change one’s religion or
belief, is violated;
(b) To ensure that no one within their jurisdiction is deprived of the right to
life, liberty or security of person because of religion or belief and that no one isA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 140
subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
or arbitrary arrest or detention on that account and to bring to justice all perpetrators
of violations of these rights;
(c) To ensure that no one is discriminated against on the basis of his or her
religion or belief when accessing, inter alia, education, medical care, employment,
humanitarian assistance or social benefits;
(d) To review, whenever relevant, existing registration practices in order to
ensure that such practices do not limit the right of all persons to manifest their
religion or belief, alone or in community with others and in public or in private;
(e) To ensure that no official documents are withheld from the individual on
the grounds of a person’s religion or belief and that everyone has the right to refrain
from disclosing information concerning one’s religious affiliation on such
documents against one’s will;
(f) To ensure that everyone has the right and opportunity to have access, on
general terms of equality, to public service in one’s country, without any
discrimination on the basis of religion or belief;
(g) To ensure, in particular, the right of all persons to worship or assemble in
connection with a religion or belief and their right to establish and maintain places
for these purposes and the right of all persons to write, issue and disseminate
relevant publications in these areas;
(h) To ensure that, in accordance with appropriate national legislation and in
conformity with international human rights law, the freedom of all persons and
members of groups to establish and maintain religious, charitable or humanitarian
institutions is fully respected and protected;
(i) To exert the utmost efforts, in accordance with their national legislation
and in conformity with international human rights law, to ensure that religious
places, sites, shrines and symbols are fully respected and protected and to take
additional measures in cases where they are vulnerable to desecration and
destruction;
(j) To ensure that all public officials and civil servants, including members
of law enforcement bodies, the military and educators, in the course of fulfilling
their official duties, respect all religions or beliefs and do not discriminate for
reasons based on religion or belief, and that all necessary and appropriate education
or training is provided;
10. Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use of print, audio-
visual or electronic media or any other means;
11. Emphasizes that freedom of religion or belief and freedom of expression
are interdependent, interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
12. Urges States to step up their efforts to eliminate intolerance and
discrimination based on religion or belief, notably by:
(a) Taking all necessary and appropriate action, in conformity with
international standards of human rights, to combat hatred, discrimination,
intolerance and acts of violence, intimidation and coercion motivated by intoleranceA/63/430/Add.2
141 08-63473
based on religion or belief, as well as incitement to hostility and violence, with
particular regard to members of religious minorities in all parts of the world, and
devoting particular attention to practices that violate the human rights of women and
discriminate against women, including in the exercise of their right to freedom of
thought, conscience, religion or belief;
(b) Promoting and encouraging, through education and other means,
understanding, tolerance and respect in all matters relating to freedom of religion or
belief and undertaking all appropriate efforts to encourage those engaged in
teaching to promote mutual understanding, tolerance and respect;
13. Emphasizes that no religion should be equated with terrorism, as this may
have adverse consequences on the enjoyment of the right to freedom of religion or
belief of all members of the religious communities concerned;
14. Stresses the need to strengthen dialogue, inter alia, through the Alliance
of Civilizations and its High Representative and the focal point designated within
the Secretariat by the General Assembly in its resolution 62/90, to interact with
various entities in the United Nations system and coordinate their contribution to
dialogue;
15. Emphasizes the importance of a continued and strengthened dialogue
among and within religions or beliefs, at all levels and with a broader participation,
including of women, to promote greater tolerance, respect and mutual
understanding;
16. Invites all actors to address in the context of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, inter alia, the following issues within the framework of
international human rights:
(a) The rise of religious extremism affecting religions in all parts of the
world;
(b) The situations of violence and discrimination that affect many women as
well as other individuals on the grounds or in the name of religion or belief or in
accordance with cultural and traditional practices;
(c) The misuse of religion or belief for ends inconsistent with the Charter of
the United Nations, as well as other relevant instruments of the United Nations;
17. Welcomes and encourages the continuing efforts of all actors in society,
including non-governmental organizations and bodies and groups based on religion
or belief, to promote the implementation of the Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,6 and
further encourages their work in promoting freedom of religion or belief and in
highlighting cases of religious intolerance, discrimination and persecution;
18. Recommends that States, the United Nations and other actors, including
non-governmental organizations and bodies and groups based on religion or belief,
in their efforts to promote freedom of religion or belief, ensure the widest possible
dissemination of the text of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, in as many different
languages as possible, and promote its implementation;
__________________
6 See resolution 36/55.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 142
19. Welcomes the work and the interim report of the Special Rapporteur on
freedom of religion or belief;7
20. Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur, to
respond favourably to her requests to visit their countries and to provide all
necessary information for the effective fulfilment of her mandate;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Special Rapporteur
receives the necessary resources to fully discharge her mandate;
22. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
23. Decides to consider the question of the elimination of all forms of
religious intolerance at its sixty-fourth session under the item entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights”.
__________________
7 See A/63/161.A/63/430/Add.2
143 08-63473
Draft resolution XV
Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 which guarantees the
right to life, liberty and security of person, the relevant provisions of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and other relevant human
rights conventions,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, as set out in Human
Rights Council resolution 8/3 of 18 June 2008,
Welcoming the universal ratification of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949,3 which alongside human rights law provide an important framework of
accountability in relation to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions during
armed conflict,
Mindful of all its resolutions on the subject of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions and the resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights and of
the Human Rights Council on the subject,
Noting with deep concern that impunity continues to be a major cause of the
perpetuation of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions,
Acknowledging that international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are complementary and mutually reinforcing,
Noting with deep concern the growing number of civilians and persons hors de
combat killed in situations of armed conflict and internal strife,
Acknowledging that extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions may under
certain circumstances amount to genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes,
as defined in international law, including in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court,4 and recalling in this regard that each individual State has the
responsibility to protect its populations from such crimes as set out in General
Assembly resolution 60/1,
Convinced of the need for effective action to prevent, combat and eliminate the
abhorrent practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, which
represent flagrant violations of human rights, particularly the right to life,
1. Strongly condemns once again all the extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions that continue to occur throughout the world;
2. Demands that all States ensure that the practice of extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions is brought to an end and that they take effective action to
prevent, combat and eliminate the phenomenon in all its forms and manifestations;
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
4 Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 144
3. Reiterates the obligation of all States to conduct exhaustive and impartial
investigations into all suspected cases of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, to identify and bring to justice those responsible, while ensuring the
right of every person to a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal established by law, to grant adequate compensation within a
reasonable time to the victims or their families, and to adopt all necessary measures,
including legal and judicial measures, to put an end to impunity and to prevent the
further occurrence of such executions, as recommended in the Principles on the
Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extralegal, Arbitrary and Summary
Executions;5
4. Calls upon Governments and invites intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to pay greater attention to the work of national
level commissions of inquiry into extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
with a view to ensuring the effective contribution of these commissions to
accountability and to combating impunity;
5. Calls upon all States, in order to prevent extrajudicial, summary and
arbitrary executions, to comply with their obligations under relevant provisions of
international human rights instruments, and further calls upon those States which
have not abolished the death penalty to pay particular regard to the provisions
contained in articles 6, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights2
and articles 37 and 40 of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child,6 bearing in mind the safeguards and guarantees set out in Economic and
Social Council resolutions 1984/50 of 25 May 1984 and 1989/64 of 24 May 1989,
and taking into account the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur regarding
the need to respect essential procedural guarantees, including the right to seek
pardon or commutation of sentence;
6. Urges all States:
(a) To take all necessary and possible measures, in conformity with
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, to prevent loss of
life, in particular that of children, during public demonstrations, internal and
communal violence, civil unrest, public emergencies or armed conflicts, and to
ensure that the police, law enforcement agents, armed forces and other agents acting
on behalf of or with the consent or acquiescence of the State act with restraint and in
conformity with international human rights law and international humanitarian law,
including the principles of proportionality and necessity, and in this regard to ensure
that police and law enforcement officials are guided by the Code of Conduct for
Law Enforcement Officials7 and the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and
Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials;8
(b) To ensure the effective protection of the right to life of all persons under
their jurisdiction and to investigate promptly and thoroughly all killings, including
those targeted at specific groups of persons, such as racially motivated violence
__________________
5 Economic and Social Council resolution 1989/65, annex.
6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7 Resolution 34/169, annex.
8 See Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Havana, 27 August-7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.A/63/430/Add.2
145 08-63473
leading to the death of the victim, killings of persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, killings of persons affected by terrorism,
hostage-taking or foreign occupation, killings of refugees, internally displaced
persons, migrants, street children or members of indigenous communities, killings
of persons for reasons related to their activities as human rights defenders, lawyers,
journalists or demonstrators, killings committed in the name of passion or in the
name of honour, all killings committed for any discriminatory reason, including
sexual orientation, as well as all other cases where a person’s right to life has been
violated, and to bring those responsible to justice before a competent, independent
and impartial judiciary at the national or, where appropriate, international level, and
to ensure that such killings, including those committed by security forces, police
and law enforcement agents, paramilitary groups or private forces, are neither
condoned nor sanctioned by State officials or personnel;
7. Affirms the obligation of States, in order to prevent extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions, to protect the lives of all persons deprived of their
liberty in all circumstances and to investigate and respond to deaths in custody;
8. Urges all States to ensure that persons deprived of their liberty are
treated humanely and with full respect for their human rights and to ensure that their
treatment, including judicial guarantees, and conditions conform to the Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners9 and, where applicable, to the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 19493
and the Additional Protocols thereto of
8 June 197710 in relation to all persons detained in armed conflict, as well as to
other pertinent international instruments;
9. Welcomes the International Criminal Court as an important contribution
to ending impunity concerning extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and,
taking note of the growing awareness of the Court worldwide, calls upon those
States that are under an obligation to cooperate with the Court to provide such
cooperation and assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and
surrender, the provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and
witnesses and the enforcement of sentences, and further welcomes the fact that one
hundred and eight States have already ratified or acceded to and that one hundred
and thirty-nine States have signed the Rome Statute of the Court, and calls upon all
those States that have not ratified or acceded to the Rome Statute to give serious
consideration to doing so;
10. Acknowledges the importance of ensuring the protection of witnesses for
the prosecution of those suspected of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,
and urges States to intensify efforts to establish and implement effective witness
protection programmes or other measures, and in this regard encourages the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to develop practical
tools designed to encourage and facilitate greater attention to the protection of
witnesses;
11. Encourages Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to organize training programmes and to support projects with a view
to training or educating military forces, law enforcement officers and government
__________________
9 Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part): Universal
Instruments (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
10 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 146
officials in human rights and humanitarian law issues connected with their work and
to include a gender and child rights perspective in such training, and appeals to the
international community and requests the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to support endeavours to that end;
12. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special
Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions to the General Assembly;11
13. Commends the important role that the Special Rapporteur plays towards
the elimination of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and encourages
the Special Rapporteur to continue, within his mandate, to collect information from
all concerned, to respond effectively to reliable information that comes before him,
to follow up on communications and country visits and to seek the views and
comments of Governments and to reflect them, as appropriate, in his reports;
14. Acknowledges the important role of the Special Rapporteur in identifying
cases where extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary executions could amount to
genocide and crimes against humanity or war crimes, and urges him to collaborate
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and, as appropriate,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, in
addressing situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions that are of
particularly serious concern or in which early action might prevent further
deterioration;
15. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Special Rapporteur
and other United Nations mechanisms and procedures in the field of human rights,
and encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue efforts in that regard;
16. Urges all States, in particular those that have not done so, to cooperate
with the Special Rapporteur so that his mandate can be carried out effectively,
including by favourably and rapidly responding to requests for visits, mindful that
country visits are one of the essential tools for the fulfilment of the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur, and by responding in a timely manner to communications and
other requests transmitted to them by the Special Rapporteur;
17. Expresses its appreciation to those States that have received the Special
Rapporteur and asks them to examine his recommendations carefully, invites them
to inform him of the actions taken on those recommendations, and requests other
States to cooperate in a similar way;
18. Again requests the Secretary-General to continue to use his best
endeavours in cases where the minimum standards of legal safeguards provided for
in articles 6, 9, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
appear not to have been respected;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
adequate human, financial and material resources to enable him to carry out his
mandate effectively, including through country visits;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close collaboration
with the High Commissioner, in conformity with the mandate of the High
Commissioner established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of
__________________
11 See A/61/311.A/63/430/Add.2
147 08-63473
20 December 1993, to ensure that personnel specialized in human rights and
humanitarian law issues form part of United Nations missions, where appropriate, in
order to deal with serious violations of human rights, such as extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions;
21. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth and sixty-fifth sessions a report on the situation worldwide in regard to
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and his recommendations for more
effective action to combat this phenomenon;
22. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its sixty-fifth
session.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 148
Draft resolution XVI
Missing persons
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes, principles and provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Guided also by the principles and norms of international humanitarian law, in
particular the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 19491 and the Additional Protocols
thereto of 1977,2 as well as international standards of human rights, in particular the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,3 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,4 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,4
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women,5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child6 and the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on
25 June 1993,7
Acknowledging the adoption of the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,8 and looking forward to its entry into
force,
Recalling all previous relevant resolutions on missing persons adopted by the
General Assembly, as well as the resolutions adopted by the Commission on Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council,
Noting with deep concern that armed conflicts are continuing in various parts
of the world, often resulting in serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law,
Noting also that the issue of persons reported missing in connection with
international or non-international armed conflicts, in particular those who are
victims of serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights
law, continues to have a negative impact on efforts to put an end to those conflicts
and causes suffering to the families of missing persons, and stressing in this regard
the need to address the issue from a humanitarian perspective, among others,
Considering that the problem of missing persons may raise questions of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, as appropriate,
Being cognizant that States that are parties to an armed conflict have a
responsibility for countering the phenomenon of missing persons and determining
the fate of missing persons and for recognizing their accountability as regards
implementing the relevant mechanisms, policies and laws,
Bearing in mind the effective search for and identification of missing persons
through traditional forensic methods, and recognizing that great technological
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
2 Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
3 Resolution 217 A (III).
4 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
8 Resolution 61/177, annex.A/63/430/Add.2
149 08-63473
progress has been achieved in the field of DNA forensic sciences, which could
significantly assist efforts to identify missing persons,
Recalling the Agenda for Humanitarian Action, in particular its general
objective 1, to “respect and restore the dignity of persons missing as a result of
armed conflicts or other situations of armed violence and of their families”, adopted
at the Twenty-eighth International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent,
held in Geneva from 2 to 6 December 2003, and resolution 3 on the reaffirmation
and implementation of international humanitarian law, entitled “Preserving human
life and dignity in armed conflict”, adopted at the Thirtieth International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 26 to 30 November 2007,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General of
18 August 2008 on missing persons, prepared pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 61/155 of 19 December 2006,9
Taking note with appreciation also of the ongoing international and regional
efforts to address the question of missing persons and of the initiatives undertaken
by international and regional organizations in this field,
1. Urges States strictly to observe and respect and ensure respect for the
rules of international humanitarian law, as set out in the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 19491
and, where applicable, in the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977;2
2. Calls upon States that are parties to an armed conflict to take all
appropriate measures to prevent persons from going missing in connection with
armed conflict and account for persons reported missing as a result of such a
situation;
3. Reaffirms the right of families to know the fate of their relatives reported
missing in connection with armed conflicts;
4. Also reaffirms that each party to an armed conflict, as soon as
circumstances permit and, at the latest, from the end of active hostilities, shall
search for the persons who have been reported missing by an adverse party;
5. Calls upon States that are parties to an armed conflict to take all
necessary measures, in a timely manner, to determine the identity and fate of
persons reported missing in connection with the armed conflict and, to the greatest
possible extent, to provide their family members, through appropriate channels, with
all relevant information they have on their fate;
6. Recognizes, in this regard, the need for the collection, protection and
management of data on missing persons according to international and national legal
norms and standards, and urges States to cooperate with each other and with other
concerned actors working in this area, inter alia, by providing all relevant and
appropriate information related to missing persons;
7. Requests States to pay the utmost attention to cases of children reported
missing in connection with armed conflicts and to take appropriate measures to
search for and identify those children and to reunite them with their families;
8. Invites States that are parties to an armed conflict to cooperate fully with
the International Committee of the Red Cross in establishing the fate of missing
__________________
9 A/63/299.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 150
persons and to adopt a comprehensive approach to this issue, including all such
legal and practical measures and coordination mechanisms as may be necessary,
based on humanitarian considerations only;
9. Urges States and encourages intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to take all necessary measures at the national, regional and
international levels to address the problem of persons reported missing in
connection with armed conflicts and to provide appropriate assistance as requested
by the concerned States, and welcomes, in this regard, the establishment and efforts
of commissions and working groups on missing persons;
10. Calls upon States, without prejudice to their efforts to determine the fate
of persons missing in connection with armed conflicts, to take appropriate steps
with regard to the legal situation of the missing persons and the need of their family
members, in fields such as social welfare, financial matters, family law and property
rights;
11. Stresses the need for addressing the issue of missing persons as a part of
peacebuilding processes, with reference to all justice and rule-of-law mechanisms,
on the basis of transparency, accountability and public involvement and
participation;
12. Welcomes the panel discussion on the question of missing persons held at
the ninth session of the Human Rights Council and takes note of the request of the
Human Rights Council to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to prepare a summary of the panel’s deliberations;10
13. Takes note of the request of the Human Rights Council to its Advisory
Committee to prepare a study on the best practices in the matter of missing persons
and to submit that study to the Council at its twelfth session;11
14. Invites relevant human rights mechanisms and procedures, as
appropriate, to address the problem of persons reported missing in connection with
armed conflicts in their forthcoming reports to the General Assembly;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the
implementation of the present resolution, including relevant recommendations, to
the Human Rights Council at its relevant session and to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fifth session;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of all Governments, the competent United Nations bodies, the specialized
agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and international humanitarian
organizations;
17. Decides to consider the question at its sixty-fifth session.
__________________
10 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/63/53/Add.1), chap. II, decision 9/101.
11 Ibid.A/63/430/Add.2
151 08-63473
Draft resolution XVII
Protection of migrants
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the protection of migrants, the most
recent of which is resolution 62/156 of 18 December 2007, and recalling also
Human Rights Council resolution 9/5 of 24 September 2008,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1 in its sixtieth
anniversary year, which proclaims that all human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out
therein, without distinction of any kind, in particular as to race, colour or national
origin,
Reaffirming also that everyone has the right to freedom of movement and
residence within the borders of each State, and to leave any country, including his
own, and return to his country,
Recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,2
the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,3
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,4
the Convention on the Rights of the Child,5 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,6 the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations7 and the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,8
Recalling also the provisions concerning migrants contained in the outcomes
of all major United Nations conferences and summits,
Underlining the importance of the Human Rights Council in promoting respect
for the protection of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all, including
migrants,
Taking note of advisory opinion OC-16/99 of 1 October 1999 on the Right to
Information on Consular Assistance in the Framework of the Guarantees of the Due
Process of Law and advisory opinion OC-18/03 of 17 September 2003 on the
Juridical Condition and Rights of Undocumented Migrants, issued by the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights,
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
4 Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
6 Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
7 Ibid., vol. 596, No. 8638.
8 Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 152
Taking note also of the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of
31 March 2004 in the case concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals,9 and
recalling the obligations of States reaffirmed therein,
Recalling the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development, held in New York on 14 and 15 September 2006 for the purpose of
discussing the multidimensional aspects of international migration and development,
which recognized the relationship between international migration, development and
human rights,
Taking note of the second meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and
Development, organized and hosted by the Government of the Philippines in
October 2008, and recognizing the inclusion of a discussion on migration,
development and human rights as one of the steps to address the multidimensional
nature of international migration,
Recalling its resolution 62/270 of 20 June 2008 on the Global Forum on
Migration and Development, as adopted, in which, inter alia, it recognized that
exchanges of information and expertise, consultation and closer cooperation
between the Global Forum on Migration and Development and the United Nations
could have a positive impact,
Noting the international meeting on the protection of the rights of children in
the context of international migration, held on 30 September and 1 October 2008 in
Mexico City, co-organized by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights,
Emphasizing the global character of the migratory phenomenon, the
importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation and dialogue in this
regard, as appropriate, and the need to protect the human rights of migrants,
particularly at a time in which migration flows have increased in the globalized
economy and take place in a context of new security concerns,
Bearing in mind that policies and initiatives on the issue of migration,
including those that refer to the orderly management of migration, should promote
holistic approaches that take into account the causes and consequences of the
phenomenon, as well as the full respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of migrants,
Noting that many migrant women are employed in the informal economy and
in less skilled work compared with that of men, which puts those women at greater
risk of abuse and exploitation,
Concerned about the large and growing number of migrants, especially women
and children, who place themselves in a vulnerable situation by attempting to cross
international borders without the required travel documents, and recognizing the
obligation of States to respect the human rights of those migrants,
Stressing the importance of regulations and laws regarding irregular migration
being in accordance with States’ obligations under international law, including
international human rights law,
__________________
9 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/59/4),
chap. V, sect. A.23; see also Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States of
America), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2004, p. 12.A/63/430/Add.2
153 08-63473
Stressing also that penalties and the treatment given to irregular migrants
should be commensurate with their infraction,
Recognizing the importance of having a comprehensive and balanced approach
to international migration, and bearing in mind that migration enriches the
economical, political, social and cultural fabric of States and the historical and
cultural ties that exist among some regions,
Underlining the importance for States, in cooperation with non-governmental
organizations, to undertake information campaigns aimed at clarifying
opportunities, limitations and rights in the event of migration, so as to enable
everyone to make informed decisions and to prevent them from utilizing dangerous
means to cross international borders,
1. Calls upon States to promote and protect effectively the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their migration status,
especially those of women and children, and to address international migration
through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and through a
comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of
countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting and protecting the human
rights of all migrants, and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their
vulnerability;
2. Also calls upon States to ensure that their laws and policies, including in
the areas of counter-terrorism and combating transnational organized crime such as
trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, fully respect the human rights of
migrants;
3. Calls upon States that have not done so to consider signing and ratifying
or acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families8
as a matter of priority, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to raise awareness of and
promote the Convention;
4. Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime10 and supplementing protocols thereto, namely, the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air11 and the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children,12 to implement them fully, and calls upon States that have not done so to
consider ratifying or acceding to them as a matter of priority;
5. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families on its seventh and eighth
sessions;13
6. Requests all States, international organizations and relevant stakeholders
to take into account in their policies and initiatives on migration issues the global
character of the migratory phenomenon and to give due consideration to
international, regional and bilateral cooperation in this field, including by
undertaking dialogues on migration that include countries of origin, destination and
__________________
10 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
11 Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
12 Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
13 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 48 (A/63/48).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 154
transit, as well as civil society, including migrants, with a view to addressing, in a
comprehensive manner, inter alia, its causes and consequences and the challenge of
undocumented or irregular migration, granting priority to the protection of the
human rights of migrants;
7. Expresses concern about legislation and measures adopted by some
States that may restrict the human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants, and
reaffirms that, when exercising their sovereign right to enact and implement
migratory and border security measures, States have the duty to comply with their
obligations under international law, including international human rights law, in
order to ensure full respect for the human rights of migrants;
8. Takes note with appreciation of the measures adopted by some States to
reduce detention periods for irregular migrants in the application of domestic
regulations and laws regarding irregular migration;
9. Calls upon all States to respect the human rights and the inherent dignity
of migrants and to put an end to arbitrary arrest and detention and, where necessary,
to review detention periods in order to avoid excessive detention of irregular
migrants, and to adopt, where applicable, alternative measures to their detention;
10. Urges all States to adopt effective measures to prevent and punish any
form of illegal deprivation of liberty of migrants by individuals or groups;
11. Requests States to adopt concrete measures to prevent the violation of the
human rights of migrants while in transit, including in ports and airports and at
borders and migration checkpoints, to train public officials who work in those
facilities and in border areas to treat migrants respectfully and in accordance with
the law, and to prosecute, in conformity with applicable law, any act of violation of
the human rights of migrants, inter alia, arbitrary detention, torture and violations of
the right to life, including extrajudicial executions, during their transit from their
country of origin to the country of destination and vice versa, including their transit
through national borders;
12. Recalls that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes that
everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for
acts violating the fundamental rights granted to him or her;
13. Takes note with appreciation of the successful implementation by some
States of alternative measures to detention in cases of undocumented migration as a
practice that deserves consideration by all States;
14. Urges States to ensure that repatriation mechanisms allow for the
identification and special protection of persons in vulnerable situations and take into
account, in conformity with their international obligations and commitments, the
principle of the best interest of the child and family reunification;
15. Underlines the right of migrants to return to their country of citizenship,
and recalls that States must ensure that their returning nationals are duly received;
16. Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to ensure full respect for
and observance of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations,7
in particular with
regard to the right of all foreign nationals, regardless of their immigration status, to
communicate with a consular official of the sending State in case of arrest,A/63/430/Add.2
155 08-63473
imprisonment, custody or detention, and the obligation of the receiving State to
inform the foreign national without delay of his or her rights under the Convention;
17. Strongly condemns the manifestations and acts of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against migrants and the
stereotypes often applied to them, including on the basis of religion or belief, and
urges States to apply and, where needed, reinforce the existing laws when
xenophobic or intolerant acts, manifestations or expressions against migrants occur,
in order to eradicate impunity for those who commit xenophobic and racist acts;
18. Requests all States, in conformity with national legislation and applicable
international legal instruments to which they are party, to enforce labour law
effectively, including by addressing violations of such law, with regard to migrant
workers’ labour relations and working conditions, inter alia, those related to their
remuneration and conditions of health, safety at work and the right to freedom of
association;
19. Encourages all States to remove obstacles that may prevent the safe,
unrestricted and expeditious transfer of remittances of migrants to their country of
origin or to any other countries, in conformity with applicable legislation, and to
consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other problems that may impede such
transfers;
20. Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries, that
allow migrants to integrate fully into the host countries, facilitate family
reunification and promote a harmonious, tolerant and respectful environment, and
encourages States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of programmes;
21. Requests Member States, the United Nations system, international
organizations, civil society and all relevant stakeholders, especially the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur on the
human rights of migrants, to ensure that the perspective of the human rights of
migrants is included among the priority issues in the ongoing discussions on
international migration and development within the United Nations system, bearing
in mind the discussions of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development held pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/208 of 23 December
2003;
22. Invites the Chairperson of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to address the General
Assembly at its future sessions under the agenda item “Promotion and protection of
human rights”;
23. Invites the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants to present
his report to the General Assembly at its future sessions under the agenda item
“Promotion and protection of human rights”;
24. Invites Member States to strengthen their efforts to raise awareness of the
important contribution of migrants to all spheres of society and to consider the
development of appropriate tools to highlight the contribution of migrants to
recipient countries, including through the collection of data and the development of
statistics;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the resources necessary, from
within existing resources of the United Nations, for the Committee on the ProtectionA/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 156
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to meet for
two separate sessions in 2009, the first session to be of two consecutive weeks’
duration and the second session to be of one week’s duration, for the purpose of
meeting the demands of the workload arising from the increasing number of reports
of States parties that have been submitted to the Committee, and invites the
Committee to consider ways of further improving the effectiveness of its working
sessions;
26. Also requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of
the present resolution at its sixty-fourth session and to include in that report an
analysis of the ways and means to promote the human rights of migrants, taking into
account the views of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, and
decides to examine the question further under the item entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”.A/63/430/Add.2
157 08-63473
Draft resolution XVIII
Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the fundamental importance, including in response to
terrorism and the fear of terrorism, of respecting all human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law,
Reaffirming further the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1
Reaffirming that States are under the obligation to protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all persons,
Reiterating the important contribution of measures taken at all levels against
terrorism, consistent with international law, in particular international human rights
law and refugee and humanitarian law, to the functioning of democratic institutions
and the maintenance of peace and security and thereby to the full enjoyment of
human rights, as well as the need to continue this fight, including through
international cooperation and the strengthening of the role of the United Nations in
this respect,
Deeply deploring the occurrence of violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the context of the fight against terrorism, as well as
violations of international refugee law and international humanitarian law,
Recognizing that respect for all human rights, respect for democracy and
respect for the rule of law are interrelated and mutually reinforcing,
Noting with concern measures that can undermine human rights and the rule of
law, such as the detention of persons suspected of acts of terrorism in the absence of
a legal basis for detention and due process guarantees, the deprivation of liberty that
amounts to placing a detained person outside the protection of the law, the trial of
suspects without fundamental judicial guarantees, the illegal deprivation of liberty
and transfer of individuals suspected of terrorist activities, and the return of suspects
to countries without individual assessment of the risk of there being substantial
grounds for believing that they would be in danger of subjection to torture, and
limitations to effective scrutiny of counter-terrorism measures,
Stressing that measures used in the fight against terrorism, including the
profiling of individuals and the use of diplomatic assurances, memorandums of
understanding and other transfer agreements or arrangements, must be in
compliance with the obligations of States under international law, including
international human rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law,
Recalling article 30 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1
and
reaffirming that acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations are activities aimed at the destruction of human rights, fundamental
freedoms and democracy, threatening the territorial integrity and security of States
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 158
and destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments, and that the international
community should take the necessary steps to enhance cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism,2
Reaffirming its unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, regardless of their motivation, as criminal and unjustifiable, and
renewing its commitment to strengthen international cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Noting the declarations, statements and recommendations of a number of
human rights treaty monitoring bodies and special procedures on the question of the
compatibility of counter-terrorism measures with human rights obligations,
Emphasizing the importance of properly interpreting and implementing the
obligations of States with respect to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, and of abiding strictly by the definition of torture
contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,3 in the fight against terrorism,
Recalling its resolutions 57/219 of 18 December 2002, 58/187 of 22 December
2003, 59/191 of 20 December 2004, 60/158 of 16 December 2005, 61/171 of
19 December 2006 and 62/159 of 18 December 2007, Commission on Human
Rights resolutions 2003/68 of 25 April 2003,4 2004/87 of 21 April 20045 and
2005/80 of 21 April 2005,6 and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
the Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council, including
Council decision 2/112 of 27 November 20067 and resolution 7/7 of 27 March
2008,8
Recalling also Human Rights Council resolution 6/28 of 14 December 2007,9
by which the Council decided to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism for a period of three years,
Recalling further its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993 and, inter alia,
the responsibility of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
promote and protect the effective enjoyment of all human rights,
Acknowledging the work of the Human Rights Council in promoting respect
for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the fight against
terrorism,
__________________
2 See sect. I, para. 17, of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III).
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
4 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23),
chap. II, sect. A.
5 Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
6 Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/62/53), chap. I, sect. B.
8 Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
9 Ibid., chap. I.A/63/430/Add.2
159 08-63473
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted on 8 September 2006,10 and reaffirming its relevant clauses on
measures to ensure respect for human rights for all, international humanitarian law
and the rule of law as the fundamental basis for the fight against terrorism,
Recalling its resolution 62/272 of 5 September 2008, by which it called upon
the United Nations entities involved in supporting counter-terrorism efforts to
continue to facilitate the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism,
1. Reaffirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
terrorism complies with their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law;
2. Deeply deplores the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims and their
families, expresses its profound solidarity with them, and stresses the importance of
providing them with assistance;
3. Expresses serious concern at the occurrence of violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the context of countering terrorism;
4. Reaffirms the obligation of States, in accordance with article 4 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,11 to respect certain rights as
non-derogable in any circumstances, recalls, in regard to all other Covenant rights,
that any measures derogating from the provisions of the Covenant must be in
accordance with that article in all cases, and underlines the exceptional and
temporary nature of any such derogations;12
5. Calls upon States to raise awareness about the importance of these
obligations among national authorities involved in combating terrorism;
6. Reaffirms that counter-terrorism measures should be implemented in full
consideration of the human rights of all, including persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and must not be discriminatory on
grounds such as race, colour, sex, language, religion or social origin;
7. Calls upon States not to resort to profiling based on stereotypes founded
on grounds of discrimination prohibited by international law, including on racial,
ethnic and/or religious grounds;
8. Urges States, while countering terrorism, to fully comply with their
obligations with regard to the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
9. Also urges States to fully respect non-refoulement obligations under
international refugee and human rights law and, at the same time, to review, with
full respect for these obligations and other legal safeguards, the validity of a refugee
status decision in an individual case if credible and relevant evidence comes to light
that indicates that the person in question has committed any criminal acts, including
terrorist acts, falling under the exclusion clauses under international refugee law;
__________________
10 Resolution 60/288.
11 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
12 See, for example, General Comment No. 29 on states of emergency adopted by the Human
Rights Committee on 24 July 2001.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 160
10. Calls upon States to refrain from returning persons, including in cases
related to terrorism, to their countries of origin or to a third State whenever such
transfer would be contrary to their obligations under international law, in particular
human rights law, international humanitarian law and international refugee law,
including in cases where there are substantial grounds for believing that they would
be in danger of subjection to torture, or where their life or freedom would be
threatened in violation of international refugee law on account of their race,
religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion,
bearing in mind obligations that States may have to prosecute individuals not
returned;
11. Also calls upon States to ensure that guidelines and practices in all border
control operations and other pre-entry mechanisms are clear and fully respect their
obligations under international law, particularly refugee law and human rights law,
towards persons seeking international protection;
12. Urges States, while countering terrorism, to ensure due process
guarantees, consistent with all relevant provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,1
and their obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights11
and under the Geneva Conventions of 194913 and the Additional
Protocols thereto, and the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees14 and
the 1967 Protocol thereto15 in their respective fields of applicability;
13. Urges all States to take all necessary steps to ensure that persons
deprived of liberty, regardless of the place of arrest or detention, benefit from the
guarantees to which they are entitled under international law, including the review
of the detention and, if subjected to trial, fundamental judicial guarantees;
14. Opposes any form of deprivation of liberty that amounts to placing a
detained person outside the protection of the law, and urges States to respect the
safeguards concerning the liberty, security and dignity of the person and to treat all
prisoners in all places of detention in accordance with international law, including
human rights law and international humanitarian law;
15. Acknowledges the adoption of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance in its resolution 61/177 of
20 December 2006, and recognizes that the entry into force of the Convention will
be an important step in support of the rule of law in countering terrorism;
16. Reaffirms that it is imperative that all States work to uphold and protect
the dignity of individuals and their fundamental freedoms, as well as democratic
practices and the rule of law, while countering terrorism;
17. Encourages States, while countering terrorism, to take into account
relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions on human rights, and encourages
them to give due consideration to the recommendations of the special procedures
and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council and the relevant comments and views
of United Nations human rights treaty bodies;
__________________
13 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
14 Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
15 Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.A/63/430/Add.2
161 08-63473
18. Calls upon States to ensure that their laws criminalizing acts of terrorism
are accessible, formulated with precision, non-discriminatory, non-retroactive and in
accordance with international law, including human rights law;
19. Recognizes the need to continue ensuring that fair and clear procedures
under the United Nations terrorism-related sanctions regime are strengthened in
order to enhance their efficiency and transparency, and welcomes and encourages
the Security Council’s continued enhancement of efforts in support of these
objectives, while emphasizing the importance of these sanctions in countering
terrorism;
20. Urges States, while ensuring full compliance with their international
obligations, to include adequate human rights guarantees in their national
procedures for the listing of individuals and entities with a view to combating
terrorism;
21. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General16 and
the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism17 submitted pursuant to resolution 62/159, and takes note of the
recommendations and conclusions contained therein;
22. Welcomes the ongoing dialogue established in the context of the fight
against terrorism between the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the relevant bodies for the promotion and protection of human
rights, and encourages the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to
strengthen the links and to continue to develop cooperation with relevant human
rights bodies, in particular with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
and other relevant special procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights
Council, giving due regard to the promotion and protection of human rights in the
ongoing work pursuant to relevant Security Council resolutions relating to
terrorism;
23. Calls upon States and other relevant actors, as appropriate, to continue to
implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,10
which, inter
alia, reaffirms respect for human rights for all and the rule of law as the fundamental
basis of the fight against terrorism;
24. Requests the Office of the High Commissioner and the Special
Rapporteur to continue to contribute to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, including by raising awareness about the need to
respect human rights while countering terrorism;
25. Requests the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to continue
its efforts to ensure that the United Nations can better coordinate and enhance
support to Member States in their efforts to implement their obligations under
international law, including international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law while countering terrorism;
__________________
16 A/63/337.
17 See A/63/223.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 162
26. Calls upon international, regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen information-sharing, coordination and cooperation in promoting the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism;
27. Acknowledges with appreciation the cooperation between the Special
Rapporteur and all other relevant procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights
Council as well as the United Nations human rights treaty bodies, and urges them to
continue their cooperation, in accordance with their mandates, and to coordinate
their efforts, where appropriate, in order to promote a consistent approach on this
subject;
28. Requests the Special Rapporteur, within the context of his mandate, to
continue to make recommendations with regard to preventing, combating and
redressing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the context of
countering terrorism;
29. Expresses serious concern about the occurrence of violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms caused while countering terrorism, and requests
the Special Rapporteur, within the context of his mandate, to continue to make
recommendations with regard to preventing, combating and redressing these
situations;
30. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur
in the performance of the tasks and duties mandated, including by reacting promptly
to the urgent appeals of the Special Rapporteur and providing the information
requested, as well as to cooperate with other relevant procedures and mechanisms of
the Human Rights Council dealing with the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism;
31. Calls upon States to give serious consideration to responding favourably
to requests by the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries;
32. Welcomes the work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to implement the mandate given to her in 2005, in resolution 60/158, and
requests the High Commissioner to continue her efforts in this regard;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution to the Human Rights Council and to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session;
34. Decides to consider at its sixty-fourth session the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism.A/63/430/Add.2
163 08-63473
Draft resolution XIX
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 61/177 of 20 December 2006, by which it adopted
and opened for signature, ratification and accession the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,
Recalling its resolution 47/133 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the
Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances as a
body of principles for all States,
Recalling also Human Rights Council resolution 7/12 of 27 March 2008, by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances for a further period of three years,
Deeply concerned in particular by the increase in enforced or involuntary
disappearances in various regions of the world, including arrest, detention and
abduction, when these are part of or amount to enforced disappearances, and by the
growing number of reports concerning harassment, ill-treatment and intimidation of
witnesses of disappearances or relatives of persons who have disappeared,
Acknowledging that acts of enforced disappearance are recognized by the
Convention as crimes against humanity, in certain circumstances,
Recognizing that the entry into force of the Convention, as soon as possible,
through its ratification by twenty States, will be a significant event,
1. Welcomes the adoption of the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance on 20 December 2006, and looks
forward to its entry into force at an early date;
2. Also welcomes the fact that since the signing ceremony for the
Convention, on 6 February 2007, seventy-nine States have signed the Convention
and five have ratified it, and calls upon States which have not done so yet to
consider signing and ratifying the Convention as a matter of priority, as well as to
consider the option provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the Convention regarding
the Committee on Enforced Disappearances;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner of Human Rights to intensify efforts to assist States to become
parties to the Convention, with a view to achieving universal adherence;
4. Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, to continue undertaking efforts to
disseminate information on the Convention, to promote its understanding, to prepare
for its entry into force and to assist States parties in implementing their obligations
under this instrument;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its
sixty-fourth session, a report on the status of the Convention and the implementation
of the present resolution.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 164
Draft resolution XX
The right to food
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming all previous resolutions and decisions on the right to food adopted
within the framework of the United Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 which provides that
everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for her or his health and well-
being, including food, the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and
Malnutrition2 and the United Nations Millennium Declaration,3 in particular
Millennium Development Goal 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger by
2015,
Recalling also the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,4 in which the fundamental right of every person to be
free from hunger is recognized,
Bearing in mind the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World
Food Summit Plan of Action5 and the Declaration of the World Food Summit: five
years later, adopted in Rome on 13 June 2002,6
Reaffirming the concrete recommendations contained in the Voluntary
Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in
the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in November 2004,7
Bearing in mind paragraph 6 of its resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated, and that they must be treated globally, in a fair and equal manner, on
the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Reaffirming also that a peaceful, stable and enabling political, social and
economic environment, at both the national and international levels, is the essential
foundation that will enable States to give adequate priority to food security and
poverty eradication,
Reiterating, as in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the
Declaration of the World Food Summit: five years later, that food should not be used
as an instrument of political or economic pressure, and reaffirming in this regard the
importance of international cooperation and solidarity, as well as the necessity of
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5-16 November 1974 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
3 See resolution 55/2.
4 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit,
13-17 November 1996 (WFS 96/REP), part one, appendix.
6 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit:
five years later, 10-13 June 2002, part one, appendix; see also A/57/499, annex.
7 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, One Hundred and Twenty-seventh Session,
Rome, 22-27 November 2004 (CL 127/REP), appendix D; see also E/CN.4/2005/131, annex.A/63/430/Add.2
165 08-63473
refraining from unilateral measures that are not in accordance with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations and that endanger food security,
Convinced that each State must adopt a strategy consistent with its resources
and capacities to achieve its individual goals in implementing the recommendations
contained in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food
Summit Plan of Action and, at the same time, cooperate regionally and
internationally in order to organize collective solutions to global issues of food
security in a world of increasingly interlinked institutions, societies and economies
where coordinated efforts and shared responsibilities are essential,
Recognizing the complex character of the worsening of the current global food
crisis, in which the right to adequate food is threatened to be violated on a massive
scale, as a combination of several major factors, including macroeconomic factors,
exacerbated by environmental degradation, desertification and global climate
change, natural disasters and the lack of the technology necessary to confront its
impact, particularly in developing countries, least developed countries and small
island developing States,
Resolved to act to ensure that the human rights perspective is taken into
account at the national, regional and international levels in measures to address the
current world food crisis,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters,
diseases and pests and their increasing impact in recent years, which have resulted
in massive loss of life and livelihood and threatened agricultural production and
food security, in particular in developing countries,
Stressing the importance of reversing the continuing decline of official
development assistance devoted to agriculture, both in real terms and as a share of
total official development assistance,
Recognizing the role of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations as the key United Nations agency for rural and agricultural development
and its work in supporting the efforts of Member States to achieve the full
realization of the right to food, including through its provision of technical
assistance to developing countries in support of the implementation of national
priority frameworks,
Taking note of the final Declaration adopted at the International Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations in Porto Alegre, Brazil, on 10 March 2006,8
Acknowledging the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis
established by the Secretary-General, and supporting the Secretary-General in
continuing his efforts in this regard, including the continued engagement with
Member States and the Special Rapporteur on the right to food,
1. Reaffirms that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of human
dignity and therefore requires the adoption of urgent measures at the national,
regional and international levels for its elimination;
__________________
8 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the International
Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 7-10 March 2006
(C 2006/REP), appendix G.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 166
2. Also reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and
nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and the fundamental right
of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully develop and maintain
his or her physical and mental capacities;
3. Considers it intolerable that more than 6 million children still die every
year from hunger-related illness before their fifth birthday and that the number of
people who are undernourished has grown to about 923 million worldwide,
including as a result of the global food crisis, while, according to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the planet could produce enough
food to feed 12 billion people, twice the world’s present population;
4. Expresses its concern that women and girls are disproportionately
affected by hunger, food insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of gender
inequality and discrimination, that in many countries, girls are twice as likely as
boys to die from malnutrition and preventable childhood diseases and that it is
estimated that almost twice as many women as men suffer from malnutrition;
5. Encourages all States to take action to address gender inequality and
discrimination against women, in particular where it contributes to the malnutrition
of women and girls, including measures to ensure the full and equal realization of
the right to food and ensuring that women have equal access to resources, including
income, land and water and their ownership, as well as full and equal access to
education, science and technology, to enable them to feed themselves and their
families;
6. Encourages the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the
right to food to continue mainstreaming a gender perspective in the fulfilment of his
mandate, and encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and all other United Nations bodies and mechanisms addressing the right to
food and food insecurity to integrate a gender perspective into their relevant
policies, programmes and activities;
7. Reaffirms the need to ensure that programmes delivering safe and
nutritious food are inclusive of and accessible to persons with disabilities;
8. Encourages all States to take steps with a view to achieving
progressively the full realization of the right to food, including steps to promote the
conditions for everyone to be free from hunger and, as soon as possible, to enjoy
fully the right to food, and to create and adopt national plans to combat hunger;
9. Recognizes the advances reached through South-South cooperation in
developing countries and regions in connection with food security and the
development of agricultural production for the full realization of the right to food;
10. Stresses that improving access to productive resources and public
investment in rural development are essential for eradicating hunger and poverty, in
particular in developing countries, including through the promotion of investments
in appropriate small-scale irrigation and water management technologies in order to
reduce vulnerability to droughts;
11. Recognizes that 80 per cent of hungry people live in rural areas and
50 per cent are small-scale farm-holders, and that these people are especially
vulnerable to food insecurity, given the increasing cost of inputs and the fall in farm
incomes; that access to land, water, seeds and other natural resources is anA/63/430/Add.2
167 08-63473
increasing challenge for poor producers; that sustainable and gender-sensitive
agricultural policies are important tools for promoting land and agrarian reform,
rural credit and insurance, technical assistance and other associated measures to
achieve food security and rural development; and that support by States for small
farmers, fishing communities and local enterprises is a key element for food security
and the provision of the right to food;
12. Stresses the importance of fighting hunger in rural areas, including
through national efforts supported by international partnerships to stop
desertification and land degradation and through investments and public policies
that are specifically appropriate to the risk of drylands, and in this regard calls for
the full implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa;9
13. Also stresses its commitments to promote and protect, without
discrimination, the economic, social and cultural rights of indigenous peoples in
accordance with international human rights obligations and, taking into account, as
appropriate, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,10
acknowledges that many indigenous organizations and representatives of indigenous
communities have expressed in different forums their deep concerns over the
obstacles and challenges they face for the full enjoyment of the right to food, and
calls upon States to take special actions to combat the root causes of the
disproportionately high level of hunger and malnutrition among indigenous peoples
and the continuous discrimination against them;
14. Notes the need to further examine various concepts such as, inter alia,
“food sovereignty” and their relation with food security and the right to food,
bearing in mind the need to avoid any negative impact on the enjoyment of the right
to food for all people at all times;
15. Requests all States and private actors, as well as international
organizations within their respective mandates, to take fully into account the need to
promote the effective realization of the right to food for all, including in the ongoing
negotiations in different fields;
16. Recognizes the need to strengthen national commitment as well as
international assistance, upon the request of and in cooperation with the affected
countries, towards the full realization and protection of the right to food, and in
particular to develop national protection mechanisms for people forced to leave their
homes and land because of hunger or humanitarian emergencies affecting the
enjoyment of the right to food;
17. Stresses the need to make efforts to mobilize and optimize the allocation
and utilization of technical and financial resources from all sources, including
external debt relief for developing countries, and to reinforce national actions to
implement sustainable food security policies;
18. Calls for the early conclusion and a successful, development-oriented
outcome of the Doha Round of trade negotiations of the World Trade Organization
__________________
9 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
10 Resolution 61/295, annex.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 168
as a contribution to creating international conditions that permit the full realization
of the right to food;
19. Stresses that all States should make all efforts to ensure that their
international policies of a political and economic nature, including international
trade agreements, do not have a negative impact on the right to food in other
countries;
20. Recalls the importance of the New York Declaration on Action against
Hunger and Poverty, and recommends the continuation of efforts aimed at
identifying additional sources of financing for the fight against hunger and poverty;
21. Recognizes that the promises made at the World Food Summit in 1996 to
halve the number of persons who are undernourished are not being fulfilled, and
invites once again all international financial and development institutions, as well as
the relevant United Nations agencies and funds, to give priority to and provide the
necessary funding to realize the aim of halving by 2015 the proportion of people
who suffer from hunger, as well as the right to food as set out in the Rome
Declaration on World Food Security5
and the United Nations Millennium
Declaration;3
22. Reaffirms that integrating food and nutritional support, with the goal that
all people at all times will have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet
their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life, is part of a
comprehensive response to the spread of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other
communicable diseases;
23. Urges States to give adequate priority in their development strategies and
expenditures to the realization of the right to food;
24. Stresses the importance of international development cooperation and
assistance, both as an effective contribution to the expansion of agriculture and food
production and, in particular in activities related to emergency situations, for the
realization of the right to food and the achievement of sustainable food security,
while recognizing that each country has the primary responsibility for ensuring the
implementation of national programmes and strategies in this regard;
25. Also stresses that States parties to the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights11 should
consider implementing that agreement in a manner supportive of food security,
while mindful of the obligation of Member States to promote and protect the right to
food;
26. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant
stakeholders to support national efforts aimed at responding rapidly to the food
crises currently occurring across Africa, and expresses its deep concern that funding
shortfalls are forcing the World Food Programme to cut operations across different
regions, including Southern Africa;
27. Invites all relevant international organizations, including the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, to continue to promote policies and projects
__________________
11 See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade
Negotiations, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales
No. GATT/1994-7).A/63/430/Add.2
169 08-63473
that have a positive impact on the right to food, to ensure that partners respect the
right to food in the implementation of common projects, to support strategies of
Member States aimed at the fulfilment of the right to food and to avoid any actions
that could have a negative impact on the realization of the right to food;
28. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special
Rapporteur on the right to food12 and the work and commitment of the first
mandate-holder to achieving the realization of the right to food;
29. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, as
extended by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 6/2 of September 2007;
30. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide all the necessary human and financial
resources for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur;
31. Welcomes the work already done by the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights in promoting the right to adequate food, in particular its General
Comment No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food (article 11 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights),13 in which the Committee
affirmed, inter alia, that the right to adequate food is indivisibly linked to the
inherent dignity of the human person and is indispensable for the fulfilment of other
human rights enshrined in the International Bill of Human Rights, and is also
inseparable from social justice, requiring the adoption of appropriate economic,
environmental and social policies, at both the national and international levels,
oriented to the eradication of poverty and the fulfilment of all human rights for all;
32. Recalls General Comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights on the right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the
Covenant),14 in which the Committee noted, inter alia, the importance of ensuring
sustainable water resources for human consumption and agriculture in realization of
the right to adequate food;
33. Reaffirms that the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive
Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security,
adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations in November 2004,7
represent a practical tool to promote the realization of
the right to food for all, contribute to the achievement of food security and thus
provide an additional instrument in the attainment of internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration;
34. Welcomes the continued cooperation of the High Commissioner, the
Committee and the Special Rapporteur, and encourages them to continue their
cooperation in this regard;
35. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special
Rapporteur in his task, to supply all necessary information requested by him and to
give serious consideration to responding favourably to the requests of the Special
Rapporteur to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more
effectively;
__________________
12 See A/63/278.
13 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 2 and
corrigendum (E/2000/22 and Corr.1), annex V.
14 Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 170
36. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on the implementation of the present
resolution and to continue his work, including by examining the emerging issues
with regard to the realization of the right to food within his existing mandate;
37. Invites Governments, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, treaty bodies, civil society actors and non-governmental organizations,
as well as the private sector, to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the
fulfilment of his mandate, inter alia, through the submission of comments and
suggestions on ways and means of realizing the right to food;
38. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its sixty-fourth
session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.A/63/430/Add.2
171 08-63473
Draft resolution XXI
Respect for the right to universal freedom of travel and the vital
importance of family reunification
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 61/162 of 19 December 2006,
Reaffirming that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are universal,
indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 as
well as article 12 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2
Stressing that, as stated in the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development,3 family reunification of documented
migrants is an important factor in international migration and that remittances by
documented migrants to their countries of origin often constitute a very important
source of foreign exchange and are instrumental in improving the well-being of
relatives left behind,
Noting with great concern that, while some positive developments have
occurred during the past few years in the accomplishment of the objectives
highlighted in all previous resolutions adopted by the General Assembly on this
matter,4 in particular relating to facilitating the flow of remittances across
international borders to help families, in certain cases it has been reported that
measures have been adopted that increased the restrictions imposed on documented
migrants in relation to family reunification and the possibility of sending
remittances to their relatives in the country of origin,
Recalling that the family is the basic unit of society and, as such, should be
strengthened, and that it is entitled to receive comprehensive protection and support,
1. Once again calls upon all States to guarantee the universally recognized
freedom of travel to all foreign nationals legally residing in their territory;
2. Reaffirms that all Governments, in particular those of receiving countries,
must recognize the vital importance of family reunification and promote its
incorporation into national legislation in order to ensure protection of the unity of
families of documented migrants;
3. Calls upon all States to allow, in conformity with international
legislation, the free flow of financial remittances by foreign nationals residing in
their territory to relatives in the country of origin;
4. Also calls upon all States to refrain from enacting, and to repeal if it
already exists, legislation intended as a coercive measure that discriminates against
individuals or groups of legal migrants by adversely affecting family reunification
and the right to send financial remittances to relatives in the country of origin;
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4 Resolutions 57/227, 59/203 and 61/162.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 172
5. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its sixty-fifth
session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.A/63/430/Add.2
173 08-63473
Draft resolution XXII
Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of a democratic and
equitable international order, including General Assembly resolution 61/160 of
19 December 2006, and taking note of Human Rights Council resolution 8/5 of
18 June 2008,
Reaffirming the commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations to promote
universal respect for, and observance and protection of, all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
other instruments relating to human rights and international law,
Affirming that the enhancement of international cooperation for the promotion
and protection of all human rights should continue to be carried out in full
conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter and international law as
set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter and, inter alia, with full respect for
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence, the non-use of force or the
threat of force in international relations and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State,
Recalling the Preamble to the Charter, in particular the determination to
reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person and in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small,
Reaffirming that everyone is entitled to a social and international order in
which the rights and freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights1 can be fully realized,
Reaffirming also the determination expressed in the Preamble to the Charter to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources
of international law can be maintained, to promote social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom, to practise tolerance and good-neighbourliness,
and to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social
advancement of all peoples,
Stressing that the responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social
issues, as well as threats to international peace and security, must be shared among
the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally, and that in this
regard the central role must be played by the United Nations, as the most universal
and representative organization in the world,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the
aspirations of all peoples for an international order based on the principles enshrined
in the Charter, including promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all and respect for the principle of equal rights and self-
determination of peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality, the rule of law,
pluralism, development, better standards of living and solidarity,
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 174
Considering also that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaims
that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone
is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any
kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion,
national or social origin, property, birth or other status,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and that
democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine their
own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in
all aspects of their lives,
Emphasizing that democracy is not only a political concept but that it also has
economic and social dimensions,
Recognizing that democracy, respect for all human rights, including the right
to development, transparent and accountable governance and administration in all
sectors of society, and effective participation by civil society are an essential part of
the necessary foundations for the realization of social and people-centred
sustainable development,
Noting with concern that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance may be aggravated by, inter alia, inequitable distribution of wealth,
marginalization and social exclusion,
Underlining the fact that it is imperative for the international community to
ensure that globalization becomes a positive force for all the world’s people, and
that only through broad and sustained efforts, based on common humanity in all its
diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable,
Recognizing the complex character of the current global food, fuel and
financial crises, in which the adequate enjoyment of all human rights is threatened
to be violated, as a combination of several major factors, including macroeconomic
and other factors, such as environmental degradation, desertification and global
climate change, natural disasters and the lack of the technology necessary to
confront its impact, particularly in developing countries and least developed
countries,
Stressing that efforts to make globalization fully inclusive and equitable must
include policies and measures, at the global level, that correspond to the needs of
developing countries and countries with economies in transition and are formulated
and implemented with their effective participation,
Stressing also the need for adequate financing of and technology transfer to
developing countries and small island developing States, including to support their
efforts to adapt to climate change,
Having listened to the peoples of the world, and recognizing their aspirations
to justice, to equality of opportunity for all, to the enjoyment of their human rights,
including the right to development, to live in peace and freedom and to equal
participation without discrimination in economic, social, cultural, civil and political
life,
Resolved to take all measures within its power to secure a democratic and
equitable international order,A/63/430/Add.2
175 08-63473
1. Affirms that everyone is entitled to a democratic and equitable
international order;
2. Also affirms that a democratic and equitable international order fosters
the full realization of all human rights for all;
3. Calls upon all Member States to fulfil their commitment expressed in
Durban, South Africa, during the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance to maximize the benefits of
globalization through, inter alia, the strengthening and enhancement of international
cooperation to increase equality of opportunities for trade, economic growth and
sustainable development, global communications through the use of new
technologies, and increased intercultural exchange through the preservation and
promotion of cultural diversity,2 and reiterates that only through broad and
sustained efforts to create a shared future based upon our common humanity and all
its diversity can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable;
4. Affirms that a democratic and equitable international order requires, inter
alia, the realization of the following:
(a) The right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they can
freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and
cultural development;
(b) The right of peoples and nations to permanent sovereignty over their
natural wealth and resources;
(c) The right of every human person and all peoples to development;
(d) The right of all peoples to peace;
(e) The right to an international economic order based on equal participation
in the decision-making process, interdependence, mutual interest, solidarity and
cooperation among all States;
(f) International solidarity, as a right of peoples and individuals;
(g) The promotion and consolidation of transparent, democratic, just and
accountable international institutions in all areas of cooperation, in particular
through the implementation of the principles of full and equal participation in their
respective decision-making mechanisms;
(h) The right to equitable participation of all, without any discrimination, in
domestic and global decision-making;
(i) The principle of equitable regional and gender-balanced representation in
the composition of the staff of the United Nations system;
(j) The promotion of a free, just, effective and balanced international
information and communications order, based on international cooperation for the
establishment of a new equilibrium and greater reciprocity in the international flow
of information, in particular correcting the inequalities in the flow of information to
and from developing countries;
__________________
2 See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 176
(k) Respect for cultural diversity and the cultural rights of all, since this
enhances cultural pluralism, contributes to a wider exchange of knowledge and
understanding of cultural backgrounds, advances the application and enjoyment of
universally accepted human rights across the world and fosters stable, friendly
relations among peoples and nations worldwide;
(l) The right of every person and all peoples to a healthy environment and to
enhanced international cooperation that responds effectively to the needs for
assistance of national efforts to adapt to climate change, particularly in developing
countries, and that promotes the fulfilment of international agreements in the field
of mitigation;
(m) The promotion of equitable access to benefits from the international
distribution of wealth through enhanced international cooperation, in particular in
economic, commercial and financial international relations;
(n) The enjoyment by everyone of ownership of the common heritage of
mankind in connection to the public right of access to culture;
(o) The shared responsibility of the nations of the world for managing
worldwide economic and social development as well as threats to international
peace and security that should be exercised multilaterally;
5. Stresses the importance of preserving the rich and diverse nature of the
international community of nations and peoples, as well as respect for national and
regional particularities and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds in
the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights;
6. Also stresses that all human rights are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated and that the international community must treat
human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the
same emphasis, and reaffirms that, while the significance of national and regional
particularities and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds must be
borne in mind, it is the duty of States, regardless of their political, economic and
cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
7. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order
based on inclusion, justice, equality and equity, human dignity, mutual
understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and universal
human rights, and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
8. Reaffirms that all States should promote the establishment, maintenance
and strengthening of international peace and security and, to that end, should do
their utmost to achieve general and complete disarmament under effective
international control, as well as to ensure that the resources released by effective
disarmament measures are used for comprehensive development, in particular that
of the developing countries;
9. Recalls the proclamation by the General Assembly of its determination to
work urgently for the establishment of an international economic order based on
equity, sovereign equality, interdependence, common interest and cooperation
among all States, irrespective of their economic and social systems, which shall
correct inequalities and redress existing injustices, make it possible to eliminate theA/63/430/Add.2
177 08-63473
widening gap between the developed and the developing countries, and ensure
steadily accelerating economic and social development and peace and justice for
present and future generations;3
10. Reaffirms that the international community should devise ways and
means to remove the current obstacles and meet the challenges to the full realization
of all human rights and to prevent the continuation of human rights violations
resulting therefrom throughout the world;
11. Urges States to continue their efforts, through enhanced international
cooperation, towards the promotion of a democratic and equitable international
order;
12. Requests the Human Rights Council, the human rights treaty bodies, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the special
mechanisms extended by the Human Rights Council and Human Rights Council
Advisory Committee to pay due attention, within their respective mandates, to the
present resolution and to make contributions towards its implementation;
13. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to build upon the issue
of the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of Member States, United Nations organs, bodies and components,
intergovernmental organizations, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and
non-governmental organizations, and to disseminate it on the widest possible basis;
15. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its sixty-fifth session
under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
__________________
3 See resolution 3201 (S-VI).A/63/430/Add.2
08-63473 178
Draft resolution XXIII
Committee on the Rights of the Child
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Convention on the Rights of the Child1 and its Optional
Protocols,2
Noting the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child,3 and the report of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child,4
1. Notes, while welcoming the entry into force of the Optional Protocols to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child,1
a backlog of more than eighty reports
exists related to the submission by States parties of their initial reports under the
Optional Protocols in conformity with their obligations, and notes with concern that
if this backlog is not addressed, it will impede the ability of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child, to consider reports in a timely manner, and in this regard takes
note of the request of the Committee on the Rights of the Child to meet in parallel
chambers to address this backlog in an effective and timely manner;
2. Decides, as an exceptional and temporary measure, to authorize the
Committee to meet in parallel chambers, of nine members each, for ten working
days of each of its three regular sessions and five working days of its pre-sessional
meeting weeks between October 2009 and October 2010, for the purposes of
considering the reports of the States parties submitted under article 44 of the
Convention, and articles 8 and 12 of its Optional Protocols, taking due account of
equitable geographical distribution and the principal legal systems;
3. Also decides to assess the situation regarding the meeting time of the
Committee at its sixty-fifth session on the basis of an evaluation made by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, taking into account a
more comprehensive approach towards the backlog of human rights treaty bodies
and the increasing number of reports of States parties to the human rights
conventions;
4. Requests the Committee to intensify its review of its working methods in
order to enhance the efficiency and quality of its proceedings, with the aim of
achieving timely consideration of reports submitted by States parties, and also
requests the Committee to review and assess its progress in order to provide an
update on this question in its report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session and inputs to the evaluation to be made by the Office of the High
Commissioner, taking into account the wider context of treaty body reform.
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
2 Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531.
3 A/63/160.
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/63/41).