United Nations A/67/457/Add.2
GeneralAssembly Distr.: General
8 December 2012
Original: English
12-63624 (E) 191212
*1263624*
Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 69 (b)
Promotion and protection of human rights: human rights
questions, including alternative approaches for improving
the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Report of the Third Committee*
Rapporteur: Mr. Suljuk Mustansar Tarar (Pakistan)
I. Introduction
1. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2012, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its sixty-seventh session, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of
human rights”, the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms” and to allocate it to the Third Committee.
2. The Third Committee held a general discussion on the sub-item jointly with
sub-item 69 (c), “Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and
representatives”, at its 22nd to 27th, 29th, 31st, 34th and 35th meetings, on 24 and
25 October and on 2, 5, 6 and 8 November 2012, and considered proposals and took
action on sub-item 69 (b) at its 35th, 36th, 38th, 40th to 44th, 47th and 48th meetings,
on 8, 13, 15, 19, 20, 26 and 28 November. An account of the Committee’s
consideration is contained in the relevant summary records (A/C.3/67/SR.22-27, 29,
31, 34-36, 38, 40-44, 47 and 48).
3. For the documents before the Committee under this sub-item, see A/67/457.
4. At the 22nd meeting, on 24 October, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights addressed the Committee and engaged in a dialogue with the
representatives of Suriname, Liechtenstein, Chile, the European Union, Malaysia, the
Russian Federation, Algeria, Costa Rica, China, Kazakhstan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
* The report of the Committee on this item is being issued in five parts, under the symbol A/67/457
and Add.1-4.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 2
Pakistan, Morocco, Norway, Switzerland, the United States of America, Cameroon (on
behalf of the African States), Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, South Africa, Cuba, Bangladesh, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Belarus, Eritrea and Angola, and with the observer for Palestine (see A/C.3/67/SR.22).
5. At the 23rd meeting, on 24 October, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran made an introductory statement and
responded to questions and comments made by the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Maldives, China, Canada, Norway, the European Union, the
United Kingdom, the United States, the Czech Republic, Brazil and Switzerland (see
A/C.3/67/SR.23).
6. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions made an introductory statement and subsequently responded to
questions and comments made by the representatives of Switzerland, Norway,
Singapore, the European Union, the United States, Kenya, the Russian Federation,
Brazil and Viet Nam (see A/C.3/67/SR.23).
7. Also at the 23rd meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the independence of
judges and lawyers made a presentation and responded to questions and comments
made by the representatives of Maldives, the Russian Federation, the United States
and the European Union (see A/C.3/67/SR.23).
8. Also at the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on violence against women,
its causes and consequences made a presentation and responded to questions and
comments made by the representatives of the United Kingdom, Liechtenstein,
Austria, Norway, Japan, Jordan, Canada, the European Union, Kenya and
Switzerland (see A/C.3/67/SR.23).
9. At the 23rd meeting, the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran made a
statement (see A/C.3/67/SR.23).
10. At the 24th meeting, on 25 October, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 made an introductory
statement and responded to questions and comments made by the representatives of
Malaysia, the European Union, Norway, Senegal, Egypt, Maldives, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Islamic Republic of Iran, and by the observer for Palestine (see
A/C.3/67/SR.24).
11. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons made an introductory statement and responded to questions and
comments made by the representatives of Switzerland, the European Union, Norway,
Canada, Austria, Azerbaijan and the Syrian Arab Republic (see A/C.3/67/SR.24).
12. Also at the 24th meeting, the Chair of the Committee on Enforced
Disappearances made an introductory statement and responded to questions and
comments made by the representatives of Argentina and the European Union (see
A/C.3/67/SR.24).
13. Also at the same meeting, the Chair of the Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances made an introductory statement and responded to
questions and comments made by Chile and the European Union (see
A/C.3/67/SR.24).A/67/457/Add.2
3 12-63624
14. At the 25th meeting, on 25 October, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Myanmar made an introductory statement and responded to
questions and comments made by the representatives of Myanmar, Malaysia, the
European Union, the Republic of Korea, Canada, Indonesia, Norway, the United
States, the Czech Republic, Japan, the United Kingdom, Thailand, Switzerland and
Argentina (see A/C.3/67/SR.25).
15. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief
made an introductory statement and responded to questions and comments made by
the representatives of Canada, the European Union, the Netherlands, the United
States, Liechtenstein, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, Austria, China,
Germany, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Viet Nam (see A/C.3/67/SR.25).
16. Also at the 25th meeting, the Special Rapporteur on human rights of migrants
made an introductory statement and responded to questions and comments made by
the representatives of Mexico, the European Union, Bangladesh, Senegal,
Switzerland and Nigeria (see A/C.3/67/SR.25).
17. Also at the same meeting, the Chair of the Committee on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families made a statement
(see A/C.3/67/SR.25).
18. At the 26th meeting, on 2 November, the Independent Expert on the promotion
of a democratic and equitable international order made an introductory statement
and responded to questions and comments by the representatives of the Russian
Federation and Cuba (see A/C.3/67/SR.26).
19. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection
of human rights while countering terrorism made an introductory statement and
responded to questions and comments made by the representatives of Switzerland,
Mexico, Pakistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the European Union, the United
States, the United Kingdom and Liechtenstein (see A/C.3/67/SR.26).
20. Also at the 26th meeting, the Independent Expert on minority issues made an
introductory statement and responded to questions and comments made by the
representatives of the European Union, the Russian Federation, Austria and the
Islamic Republic of Iran (see A/C.3/67/SR.26).
21. Also at the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the right to food made an
introductory statement and responded to questions and comments made by the
representatives of the European Union, Cameroon, Haiti, Cuba, Kenya, Norway and
Bangladesh (see A/C.3/67/SR.26).
22. Also at the 26th meeting, the Chair of the Working Group on the Right to
Development made a statement (see A/C.3/67/SR.26).
23. At the 27th meeting, on 2 November, the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea made an introductory
statement and responded to questions and comments made by the representatives of
the European Union, the Republic of Korea, Japan, the Czech Republic, Belarus, the
United States, the United Kingdom, Norway, Switzerland, Canada, Cuba, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and China (see A/C.3/67/SR.27).A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 4
24. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights
made an introductory statement and responded to questions and comments made by
the representatives of the European Union and Cuba (see A/C.3/67/SR.27).
25. Also at the same meeting, the Chair of the Working Group on the issue of
human rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises made an
introductory statement and responded to questions and comments made by the
representatives of Norway, Switzerland, the United States and the Russian
Federation (see A/C.3/67/SR.27).
26. Also at the 27th meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth,
justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence made an introductory statement
and responded to questions and comments made by the representatives of the
European Union, Chile, Morocco, Switzerland and Norway (see A/C.3/67/SR.27).
27. Also at the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights
read out statements on behalf of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights defenders, the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the
right to an adequate standard of living, and the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children (see A/C.3/67/SR.27).
28. At the 29th meeting, on 5 November the Special Rapporteur on the question of
human rights and extreme poverty made an introductory statement and responded to
questions and comments made by the representatives of Chile, Brazil, the European
Union and Viet Nam (see A/C.3/67/SR.29).
29. At the same meeting, the Special Rapporteur on the question of human rights
and extreme poverty read out statements on behalf of the Special Rapporteur on the
right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right
to freedom of opinion and expression, the Special Rapporteur on the human right to
safe drinking water and sanitation, the Special Rapporteur on the right to education,
and the Independent Expert on the effects of foreign debt and other related
international financial obligations of States on the full enjoyment of human rights,
particularly economic, social and cultural rights (see A/C.3/67/SR.29).
30. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Belarus made a statement (see
A/C.3/67/SR.29).
31. Also at the 29th meeting, the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
made an introductory statement on several reports under the agenda item and
responded to questions and comments made by the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (see A/C.3/67/SR.29).
32. Also at the same meeting, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
introduced the report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar (A/67/333), which was followed by a statement made by the
representative of Myanmar (see A/C.3/67/SR.29).
33. Also at the 29th meeting, the Assistant Secretary-General for Programme
Planning, Budget and Accounts introduced the report of the Secretary-General on
the Khmer Rouge trials (A/67/380) (see A/C.3/67/SR.29).A/67/457/Add.2
5 12-63624
II. Consideration of proposals
A. Draft resolutions A/C.3/67/L.27 and Rev.1
34. At the 35th meeting, on 8 November, the representative of Qatar introduced a
draft resolution entitled “United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation
Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region” (A/C.3/67/L.27), which read:
“The General Assembly,
“Guided by the fundamental and universal principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
“Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of 1993,
which reiterated the need to consider the possibility of establishing regional
and subregional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human
rights where they do not already exist,
“Recalling also its resolutions 32/127 of 16 December 1977, 51/102 of
12 December 1996 and all its subsequent resolutions concerning regional
arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
“Recalling further its resolution 60/153 of 16 December 2005 on the
establishment of a United Nations human rights training and documentation
centre for South-West Asia and the Arab region,
“Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/51 of 9 March
1993 and all its subsequent resolutions concerning regional arrangements for
the promotion and protection of human rights,
“Reaffirming that regional cooperation plays a fundamental role in
promoting and protecting human rights and should reinforce universal human
rights, as contained in international human rights instruments, and their
protection,
“Welcoming the training activities and regional consultations conducted
by the United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for
South-West Asia and the Arab Region,
“Noting that the developments in the Middle East and North Africa have
generated growing demand for the services of the Centre, which as a result
will not be able to discharge its mandate effectively without the allocation of
adequate resources on an ongoing basis from the regular budget of the United
Nations, as identified in the report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights,
“Mindful of the vastness of and the diversity within South-West Asia and
the Arab region,
“1. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Human Rights
Training and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region;
“2. Notes the support provided for the establishment of the Centre by
the host country;A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 6
“3. Also notes that the Centre has conducted a number of training
activities and regional consultations on United Nations human rights
mechanisms, human trafficking, media and human rights education;
“4. Further notes that the Centre is receiving an increasing number of
requests for training and documentation, including in the Arabic language,
which require additional resources and the reinforcement of its activities;
“5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide funds and human
resources from the regular budget of the United Nations to enable the Centre to
respond positively and effectively to the growing needs in South-West Asia
and the Arab region, to fulfil its mandate to undertake training and
documentation activities and to support such efforts undertaken within the
region by Governments, United Nations agencies and programmes, national
human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations according to
international human rights standards;
“6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its sixty-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution.”
35. At its 47th meeting, on 28 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution entitled “United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation
Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region” (A/C.3/67/L.27/Rev.1), submitted
by the sponsor of A/C.3/67/L.27 and Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Cameroon, the Comoros,
Egypt, Grenada, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, the
Philippines, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Sudan,
Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
36. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Committee read out a statement of
the programme budget implications of the draft resolution (see A/C.3/67/SR.47).
37. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.27/Rev.1 by a recorded vote of 149 to 1, with 17 abstentions (see para. 137,
draft resolution I). The voting was as follows:1
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
__________________
1 The delegation of Indonesia indicated that it had intended to vote in favour.A/67/457/Add.2
7 12-63624
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
Syrian Arab Republic.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Indonesia, Japan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Samoa, Sri Lanka,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe.
38. Also at the 47th meeting, statements were made before the vote by the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic and the United States of America;
statements were made after the vote by the representatives of Cyprus (on behalf of
the European Union) and Japan (see A/C.3/67/SR.47).
B. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.28
39. At the 35th meeting, on 8 November, the representative of Morocco, on behalf
of Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Canada, the Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America, introduced a draft resolution entitled “The role of the Ombudsman, mediator
and other national human rights institutions in the promotion and protection of human
rights” (A/C.3/67/L.28). Subsequently, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Costa Rica, Croatia, Gabon, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Malta,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of Korea, South Sudan, the
Sudan, Ukraine, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
40. At its 41st meeting, on 20 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.28 (see para. 137, draft resolution II).
C. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.32/Rev.1
41. At the 43rd meeting, on 26 November, the representative of Peru, on behalf of
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 8
Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Guatemala,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, the Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uruguay and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), introduced a draft resolution entitled “Human rights and
extreme poverty” (A/C.3/67/L.32/Rev.1). Subsequently, Albania, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Benin, Burundi, Cameroon, China, the Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Honduras, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Malaysia, Malta, Poland, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Spain, Suriname,
Tunisia, Ukraine and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
42. At its 47th meeting, on 28 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.32/Rev.1 (see para. 137, draft resolution III).
43. Statements were made by the representatives of the United States of America
and Chile after the adoption of the draft resolution (see A/C.3/67/SR.47).
D. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.33
44. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of Egypt, on behalf
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, the Central African Republic, Chad, China, the
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, the Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Somalia, Sri Lanka, South Sudan, the Sudan, Swaziland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen and Zimbabwe, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights” (A/C.3/67/L.33). Subsequently,
Angola, the Congo, the Dominican Republic, the Gambia, India, the Philippines,
Saint Lucia, Togo, Rwanda and Zambia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
45. At its 47th meeting, on 28 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.33 by a recorded vote of 128 to 53 (see para. 137, draft resolution IV).
The voting was as follows:A/67/457/Add.2
9 12-63624
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
None.
46. Before the vote, the representative of Cyprus made a statement on behalf of
the European Union (see A/C.3/67/SR.47).
E. Draft resolutions A/C.3/67/L.34 and Rev.1
47. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of Austria, on behalf
of Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 10
Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Uruguay,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Human rights in the administration of justice”
(A/C.3/67/L.34), which read:
“The General Assembly,
“Bearing in mind the principles embodied in articles 3, 5, 8, 9 and 10 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the relevant provisions of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocols thereto, in particular articles 6, 7, 9 and 10 of the Covenant, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, in particular articles 37, 39 and 40, and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as well as
all other relevant international treaties,
“Calling attention to the numerous international standards in the field of
the administration of justice,
“Recalling all the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social
Council that are relevant to the subject of human rights in the administration of
justice, including General Assembly resolutions 62/158 of 18 December 2007
and 65/213 of 21 December 2010, and Human Rights Council resolutions 10/2
of 25 March 2009 and 18/12 of 29 September 2011,
“Welcoming General Assembly resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012
entitled ‘Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on
the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels’,
“Welcoming also the entry into force of the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and encouraging
all States that have not done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the
Convention,
“Welcoming further the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of
Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the
Bangkok Rules),
“Welcoming the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to
Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems,
“Taking note of general comments No. 21, on the humane treatment of
prisoners deprived of their liberty, and No. 32, on the right to equality before
courts and tribunals and to a fair trial, and general comments No. 10, on
children’s rights in juvenile justice, and No. 13, on the rights of the child to
freedom from all forms of violence, adopted by the Committee on the Rights
of the Child,
“Noting with appreciation the important work in the field of the
administration of justice of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women as well
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence againstA/67/457/Add.2
11 12-63624
Children and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict,
“Noting with satisfaction the work of the Interagency Panel on Juvenile
Justice and of its members, in particular their coordination in providing
technical advice and assistance in juvenile justice, and the active participation
of civil society in their respective work,
“Convinced that the independence and impartiality of the judiciary and
the integrity of the judicial system as well as an independent legal profession
are essential prerequisites for the protection of human rights, the rule of law,
good governance and democracy, as well as for ensuring that there is no
discrimination in the administration of justice, and should therefore be
respected in all circumstances,
“Recalling that every State should provide an effective framework of
remedies to redress human rights grievances or violations,
“Emphasizing that the right to access to justice for all forms an important
basis for strengthening the rule of law through the administration of justice,
“Mindful of the importance of ensuring respect for the rule of law and
human rights in the administration of justice as a crucial contribution to
building peace and justice and ending impunity,
“Recognizing the importance of the principle that persons deprived of
their liberty shall retain their non-derogable human rights and all other human
rights and fundamental freedoms, except for those lawful limitations that are
demonstrably necessitated by the fact of incarceration,
“Recalling that the social rehabilitation of persons deprived of their
liberty shall be among the essential aims of the criminal justice system,
ensuring, as far as possible, that offenders are able to lead a law-abiding and
self-supporting life upon their return to society,
“Aware of the need for special vigilance with regard to the specific
situation of children, juveniles and women in the administration of justice, in
particular while they are deprived of their liberty, and their vulnerability to
various forms of violence, abuse, injustice and humiliation,
“Recognizing the specific needs of children formerly associated with
armed forces or armed groups, and noting that these children, when accused of
crimes under international law allegedly committed while associated with
armed forces or armed groups, should be considered primarily as victims and
not only as perpetrators,
“Reaffirming that the best interests of the child shall be a primary
consideration in all decisions concerning the child in the administration of
justice, including in relation to pretrial measures, as well as being an important
consideration in all matters concerning the child related to sentencing of his or
her parents, or, where applicable, legal guardians or primary caregivers,
“1. Welcomes the most recent report submitted by the Secretary-
General to the General Assembly on human rights in the administration of
justice;A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 12
“2. Also welcomes the most recent report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the protection of human rights of
juveniles deprived of their liberty as well as the joint report of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Violence against Children on prevention of and responses to
violence against children within the juvenile justice system, both submitted to
the Human Rights Council;
“3. Reaffirms the importance of the full and effective implementation
of all United Nations standards on human rights in the administration of
justice;
“4. Reiterates its call to all Member States to spare no effort in
providing for effective legislative and other mechanisms and procedures, as
well as adequate resources, to ensure the full implementation of those
standards;
“5. Invites States to make use of technical assistance offered by the
relevant United Nations entities and programmes in order to strengthen
national capacities and infrastructures in the field of the administration of
justice;
“6. Appeals to Governments to include in their national development
plans the administration of justice as an integral part of the development
process and to allocate adequate resources for the provision of legal aid
services with a view to promoting and protecting human rights, and invites the
international community to respond favourably to requests for financial and
technical assistance for the enhancement and strengthening of the
administration of justice;
“7. Stresses the special need for national capacity-building in the field
of the administration of justice, in particular through reform of the judiciary,
the police and the penal system, as well as juvenile justice reform, in order to
establish and maintain stable societies and the rule of law in post-conflict
situations, and in this context welcomes the role of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in supporting the establishment
and functioning of transitional justice mechanisms in post-conflict situations;
“8. Affirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
terrorism, including in the administration of justice, complies with their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law;
“9. Notes the work of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group
to exchange information on best practices, as well as on national legislation
and existing international law, and on the revision of existing United Nations
standard minimum rules for the treatment of prisoners so that they reflect
recent advances in correctional science and best practices, with a view to
reporting on its progress to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice at its twenty-second session, and in this regard invites the expert group
to benefit from the expertise of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other relevant stakeholders;A/67/457/Add.2
13 12-63624
“10. Recalls the absolute prohibition of torture in international law, and
calls upon States to address and prevent the detention conditions, treatment
and punishment of persons deprived of their liberty that amount to cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
“11. Urges States to endeavour to reduce, where appropriate, pretrial
detention, inter alia, by adopting legislative and administrative measures and
policies on its preconditions, limitations, duration and alternatives and by
taking measures aimed at the implementation of existing legislation, as well as
by ensuring access to justice and legal advice and assistance;
“12. Encourages States to address overcrowding in detention facilities
by taking effective measures, including through enhancing the use of
alternatives to pretrial detention and custodial sentences where possible,
access to legal aid and the efficiency as well as the capacity of the criminal
justice system and its facilities;
“13. Continues to encourage States to pay due attention to the United
Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial
Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules) when developing and
implementing relevant legislation, procedures, policies and action plans, and
invites relevant special procedure mandate holders, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and all other relevant organizations to take these rules into
consideration in their activities;
“14. Recognizes that every child and juvenile in conflict with the law
must be treated in a manner consistent with his or her rights, dignity and needs,
in accordance with international law, bearing in mind relevant international
standards on human rights in the administration of justice, and calls upon
States parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child to abide strictly by
its principles and provisions;
“15. Encourages States that have not yet integrated children’s issues into
their overall rule of law efforts to do so, and to develop and implement a
comprehensive juvenile justice policy to prevent and address juvenile
delinquency, as well as with a view to promoting, inter alia, the use of
alternative measures, such as diversion and restorative justice, and complying
with the principle that deprivation of liberty of children should be used only as
a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time, as well
as to avoid, wherever possible, the use of pretrial detention for children;
“16. Stresses the importance of including reintegration strategies for
former child offenders in juvenile justice policies, in particular through
education programmes, with a view to their assuming a constructive role in
society;
“17. Urges States to take all necessary and effective measures, including
legal reform where appropriate, to prevent and respond to all forms of violence
against children within the justice system;
“18. Also urges States to ensure that, under their legislation and practice,
neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without the possibility of
release, nor corporal punishment as a sentence or as a disciplinary measure, isA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 14
imposed for offences committed by persons under 18 years of age, and invites
States to consider repealing life imprisonment with the possibility of release
for offences committed by persons under 18 years of age;
“19. Encourages States not to set the minimum age of criminal
responsibility at too low an age level, bearing in mind the emotional, mental
and intellectual maturity of the child, and, in this respect, refers to the
recommendation of the Committee on the Rights of the Child to increase the
lower minimum age of criminal responsibility without exception to the age of
12 years as the absolute minimum age, and to continue to increase it to a
higher age level;
“20. Also encourages States to collect relevant information concerning
children within their criminal justice systems so as to improve their
administration of justice, while being mindful of the children’s right to privacy,
with full respect for relevant international human rights instruments, and
bearing in mind applicable international standards on human rights in the
administration of justice;
“21. Stresses the importance of paying greater attention to the impact of
the imprisonment of parents on their children, while noting with interest the
day of general discussion on the theme ‘The situation of children of prisoners’,
held by the Committee on the Rights of the Child on 30 September 2011, as
well as the summary report on the full-day meeting of the Human Rights
Council on the rights of the child;
“22. Invites Governments to provide for tailored and interdisciplinary
human rights training, including anti-racist, multicultural, gender-sensitive and
child rights training to all judges, lawyers, prosecutors, social workers,
immigration and police officers and other professionals concerned, including
personnel deployed in international field presences;
“23. Encourages the regional commissions, the specialized agencies,
United Nations institutes active in the areas of human rights and crime
prevention and criminal justice, and other relevant parts of the United Nations
system, as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
including national professional associations concerned with promoting United
Nations standards in this field, and other segments of civil society, including
the media, to continue to develop their activities in promoting human rights in
the administration of justice;
“24. Invites States, upon their request, to benefit from technical advice
and assistance in juvenile justice provided by the relevant United Nations
entities and programmes, in particular the Interagency Panel on Juvenile
Justice, in order to strengthen national capacities and infrastructures in the
field of the administration of justice, in particular juvenile justice;
“25. Invites the Human Rights Council and the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, as well as the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, to continue to closely coordinate their activities relating
to the administration of justice;A/67/457/Add.2
15 12-63624
“26. Invites the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to reinforce,
within their respective mandates, their activities relating to national capacity-
building in the field of the administration of justice, in particular in post-
conflict situations, and in this context to cooperate with relevant departments
of the Secretariat, including the Peacebuilding Support Office, the Department
of Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
“27. Underlines the importance of rebuilding and strengthening
structures for the administration of justice and of respecting the rule of law and
human rights, including in post-conflict situations, as a crucial contribution to
building peace and justice and ending impunity, and in this respect requests the
Secretary-General to ensure system-wide coordination and coherence of
programmes and activities of the relevant parts of the United Nations system,
including through the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group chaired
by the Deputy Secretary-General and supported by the Rule of Law Unit of the
Secretariat, and in cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission, including
assistance provided through United Nations field presences;
“28. Invites States, in the context of the universal periodic review
mechanism and in their reports under international human rights treaties, to
consider addressing the promotion and protection of human rights in the
administration of justice;
“29. Invites relevant special procedure mandate holders of the Human
Rights Council as well as relevant treaty bodies to give special attention to
questions relating to the effective protection of human rights in the
administration of justice, including juvenile justice, and to provide, wherever
appropriate, specific recommendations in this regard, including proposals for
advisory services and technical assistance measures;
“30. Invites the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
to consider developing a set of model strategies and practical measures on the
elimination of violence against children in the field of crime prevention and
criminal justice in consultation with all Member States and in close
collaboration with all relevant United Nations entities, in particular with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
“31. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its sixty-eighth session and to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-fourth
session a report on the latest developments, challenges and good practices in
human rights in the administration of justice, analysing the international legal
and institutional framework for the protection of all persons deprived of their
liberty, as well as the activities undertaken by the United Nations system as a
whole;
“32. Decides to continue its consideration of the question of human
rights in the administration of justice at its sixty-ninth session under the item
entitled ‘Promotion and protection of human rights’.”
48. At its 41st meeting, on 20 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution, entitled “Human rights in the administration of justice”
(A/C.3/67/L.34/Rev.1), submitted by the sponsors of draft resolutionA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 16
A/C.3/67/L.34 2 and the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Honduras, India, Mali,
Mongolia, Morocco, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea and Ukraine.
49. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Committee read out a statement of
the programme budget implications of the draft resolution (see A/C.3/67/SR.41).
50. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.34/Rev.1 (see para. 137, draft resolution V).
51. The representative of the United States of America made a statement (see
A/C.3/67/SR.41).
F. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.35
52. At the 41st meeting, on 20 November, the representative of Slovenia, on behalf
of Argentina, Armenia, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chile, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Jordan, Kenya,
Liechtenstein, Malawi, Mali, Montenegro, Namibia, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, the Republic of Korea, Serbia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Sweden,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Uruguay and
Zambia, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Committee on the Rights of the
Child” (A/C.3/67/L.35). Subsequently, Albania, Austria, Azerbaijan, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cyprus, Finland, France, Honduras, Ireland, Israel, Lebanon,
Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Madagascar, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Senegal, Slovakia, Switzerland, Togo, Tunisia, Ukraine and
the United Republic of Tanzania joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
53. At the 48th meeting, on 28 November, the attention of the Committee was
drawn to a statement of the programme budget implications of the draft resolution,
contained in document A/C.3/67/L.69.
54. At the same meeting, the representative of Costa Rica orally revised the draft
resolution as follows:
(a) In the fourth preambular paragraph, the words “increasing number of
reports of States parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Optional Protocols” were replaced by the words “increasing backlog of reports of
States parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional
Protocols awaiting review by the Committee”;
(b) In operative paragraph 1, the words “continue its activities” were
replaced by the words “build upon its activities”;
(c) In operative paragraph 3, after the words “Decides to authorize the
Committee”, the words “recognizing that such a temporary measure is not a long-
term solution to the backlog and” were added; the year “2013” was replaced by
“2014” and the year “2014” was replaced by “2015”;
(d) After operative paragraph 3, a new operative paragraph was inserted,
reading:
__________________
2 The representative of Austria informed the Committee that China was not a sponsor of draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.34/Rev.1.A/67/457/Add.2
17 12-63624
“Invites States parties to adhere to the page limit established by the
Committee for reports of States parties, and notes that this would reduce the
operating costs of the Committee”.
55. At the same meeting, the Committee was informed that, in view of the
revisions made, the programme budget implications contained in document
A/C.3/67/L.69 would no longer apply.
56. Also at its 48th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.35, as orally revised (see para. 137, draft resolution VI).
57. After the adoption of the resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of the Russian Federation, Japan, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America (see A/C.3/67/SR.48).
G. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36 and amendments thereto contained
in documents A/C.3/67/L.67 and A/C.3/67/L.68
58. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of Sweden, on behalf
of Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Island and Uruguay, introduced a draft
resolution entitled “Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions” (A/C.3/67/L.36).
Subsequently, Armenia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Malta, the Netherlands, the Republic
of Korea, Spain, Timor-Leste, Ukraine and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
Action on amendments to draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36
59. At its 42nd meeting, on 20 November, the Committee took action on proposed
amendments to draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36, which were submitted in documents
A/C.3/67/L.67 and A/C.3/67/L.68, as set out below.
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/67/L.67
60. At the 42nd meeting, the representative of Singapore, on behalf of Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, China, Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Singapore, Uganda and Viet Nam, introduced the amendment to
draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36 contained in document A/C.3/67/L.67, by which the
eighth preambular paragraph would be deleted.
61. At the same meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/67/L.67 by a recorded vote of 78 to 50, with 38 abstentions. The
voting was as follows:A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 18
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, China, Congo,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central
African Republic, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Fiji,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria,
Philippines, Senegal, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Tuvalu, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Vanuatu,
Zambia.
62. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of the Sudan (on
behalf of the Group of Arab States), Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, Switzerland and
Norway (see A/C.3/67/SR.42).
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/67/L.68
63. At the 42nd meeting, the representative of the United Arab Emirates (on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation) introduced the amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.36 contained in document A/C.3/67/L.68, by which in
operative paragraph 6 (b), the words “or because of their sexual orientation or
gender identity” would be replaced with the words “or for any other reason”.
64. At the same meeting, the Committee rejected the proposed amendment
contained in document A/C.3/67/L.68, by a recorded vote of 86 to 44, with
31 abstentions. The voting was as follows:A/67/457/Add.2
19 12-63624
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Yemen.
Against:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central
African Republic, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Mali,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Peru, Philippines, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Sri Lanka,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
65. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Sweden,
Ireland, the United States of America, Brazil and South Africa (see A/C.3/67/SR.42).
Action on draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36 as a whole
66. At its 42nd meeting, on 20 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.36 by a recorded vote of 108 to 1, with 65 abstentions (see para 137,
draft resolution VII). The voting was as follows:3
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
__________________
3 The delegation of Trinidad and Tobago subsequently indicated that it had intended to vote in
favour.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 20
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Against:
Iran (Islamic Republic of).
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, China,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
67. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Sweden, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, South Africa, Trinidad and Tobago, Singapore, Egypt and
Grenada; after the vote, statements were made by the representatives of India,
Jamaica, the United States of America, Japan, China and Brunei Darussalam (see
A/C.3/67/SR.42).
H. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.37
68. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, as well as the Russian Federation,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Enhancement of international cooperation in
the field of human rights” (A/C.3/67/L.37). Subsequently, El Salvador joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
69. At the 44th meeting, on 26 November, the representative of Cuba orally
revised the draft resolution as follows:
(a) Operative paragraph 12, which read:
“12. Welcomes the initiative of the Human Rights Council to organize a
seminar on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
rights, with the participation of States, relevant United Nations agencies, fundsA/67/457/Add.2
21 12-63624
and programmes and other stakeholders, including academic experts and civil
society”,
was replaced by:
“12. Recalls the initiative of the Human Rights Council to organize a
seminar on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
rights, with the participation of States, relevant United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes and other stakeholders, including academic experts and civil
society, as decided in Council resolution 19/33”.
70. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution, as orally
revised (see para 137, draft resolution VIII).
71. After the adoption of the draft resolution, the representative of the United
States of America made a statement (see A/C.3/67/SR.44).
I. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.38
72. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, introduced a draft resolution entitled
“Human rights and unilateral coercive measures” (A/C.3/67/L.38). Subsequently,
China joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
73. At the 44th meeting, on 26 November, the representative of Cuba made a
statement (see A/C.3/67/SR.44).
74. At its 44th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.38 by
a recorded vote of 115 to 52, with 2 abstentions (see para. 137, draft resolution IX).
The voting was as follows:4
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
__________________
4 Subsequently, the delegations of Afghanistan, Malawi and the Sudan indicated that they had
intended to vote in favour.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 22
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of) Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Malawi.
J. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.39
75. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, as well as South Sudan, introduced a draft
resolution entitled “The right to development” (A/C.3/67/L.39). Subsequently,
China and El Salvador joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
76. At the 47th meeting, on 28 November, the representative of Cuba orally
revised the draft resolution as follows:
(a) The sixteenth preambular paragraph, which read:
“Noting with sadness the passing of the former Chair-Rapporteur of the
Working Group, and welcoming the new mandate holder”,
was deleted:
(b) Operative paragraph 3, which read:
“Endorses the conclusions and recommendations adopted by consensus
by the Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human Rights
Council at its eleventh session, and calls for their immediate, full and effective
implementation by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and other relevant actors”,
was replaced by:
“Endorses the conclusions and recommendations adopted by consensus
by the Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human Rights
Council at its eleventh session, and while reaffirming them, calls for their
immediate, full and effective implementation by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other relevant actors,
noting also the efforts under way within the framework of the Working Group
with a view to completing the tasks entrusted to it by the Human Rights
Council in its resolution 4/4”,A/67/457/Add.2
23 12-63624
(c) The words “with the recognition that the Working Group may convene
annual sessions of five working days and submit its reports to the Council: were
added at the end of operative paragraph 4;
(d) Operative paragraph 7, which read:
“Notes the efforts under way within the framework of the Working Group
with a view to completing the tasks entrusted to it by the Human Rights
Council in its resolution 4/4, and reaffirms the conclusions and
recommendations of the Working Group agreed upon at its eleventh session”,
was deleted and the remaining paragraphs were renumbered accordingly;
(e) Operative paragraph 8 (former paragraph 9), which read:
“Stresses that it is important that the views requested of Member States
and relevant stakeholders on the work of the high-level task force and the way
forward take into consideration the essential features of the right to
development, using as a reference the Declaration on the Right to
Development and resolutions on the right to development of the Commission
on Human Rights, the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly”,
was replaced by:
“Encourages Member States and relevant stakeholders, when submitting
views on the work of the high-level task force and the way forward, to take
into consideration the essential features of the right to development, using as a
reference the Declaration on the Right to Development and resolutions on the
right to development of the Commission on Human Rights, the Human Rights
Council and the General Assembly”.
77. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.39,
as orally revised, by a recorded vote of 147 to 4, with 29 abstentions (see para. 137,
draft resolution X). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Gambia, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 24
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Canada, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Japan, Latvia,
Lithuania, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine.
78. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of the United
States of America and the Islamic Republic of Iran; after the vote, statements were
made by the representatives of Canada and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland (see A/C.3/67/SR.47).
K. Draft resolutions A/C.3/67/L.40 and Rev.1
79. At the 43rd meeting, on 26 November, the representative of Mexico, on behalf
of Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Burkina Faso, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Kyrgyzstan,
Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Paraguay, the Philippines,
Senegal, Somalia, South Sudan, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda and Uruguay,
introduced a draft resolution entitled “Protection of migrants” (A/C.3/67/L.40),
which read:
“The General Assembly,
“Recalling all its previous resolutions on the protection of migrants, the
most recent of which is resolution 66/172 of 19 December 2011, as well as its
resolution 66/128 of 19 December 2011, on violence against women migrant
workers, and recalling also Human Rights Council resolution 20/3 of 5 July
2012,
“Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
proclaims that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights
and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein,
without distinction of any kind, in particular as to race, colour or national
origin,
“Reaffirming also that everyone has the right to freedom of movement
and residence within the borders of each State and the right to leave any
country, including his or her own, and to return to his or her country,
“Recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading TreatmentA/67/457/Add.2
25 12-63624
or Punishment, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the
Vienna Convention on Consular Relations and the International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families,
“Recalling also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development, entitled ‘The future we want’, which calls upon
States to promote and protect effectively the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants regardless of migration status, especially those of
women and children, and to address international migration through
international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and a
comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles and
responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting and
protecting the human rights of all migrants, and avoiding approaches that
might aggravate their vulnerability,
“Recalling further the provisions concerning migrants contained in the
outcome documents of all major United Nations conferences and summits,
including the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and
Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development, which recognizes that
migrant workers are among the most affected and vulnerable in the context of
financial and economic crises,
“Recalling further Commission on Population and Development
resolutions 2006/2 of 10 May 2006 and 2009/1 of 3 April 2009,
“Recalling that the Commission on Population and Development will
consider the issue of new trends in migration: demographic aspects at its forty-
sixth session in 2013,
“Taking note of advisory opinion OC-16/99 of 1 October 1999 on the
Right to Information on Consular Assistance in the Framework of the
Guarantees of the Due Process of Law and advisory opinion OC-18/03 of
17 September 2003 on the Juridical Condition and Rights of Undocumented
Migrants, issued by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights,
“Taking note also of the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of
31 March 2004 in the case concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals
and the Judgment of the Court of 19 January 2009 regarding the request for
interpretation of the Avena Judgment, and recalling the obligations of States
reaffirmed in both decisions,
“Underlining the importance of the Human Rights Council in promoting
respect for the protection of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all,
including migrants,
“Recognizing the increasing participation of women in international
migration movements,
“Looking forward to the convening of the High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development in 2013, and recalling the previous
High-level Dialogue on the subject, held in New York on 14 and 15 SeptemberA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 26
2006, for the purpose of discussing the multidimensional aspects of
international migration and development, at which, inter alia, the relationship
between international migration, development and human rights was
recognized,
“Noting that the sixth meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and
Development, to be held in Mauritius on 21 and 22 November 2012, will draw
together the outcomes of several preparatory meetings, focusing on the
overarching theme ‘Enhancing the development of migrants and their
contribution to the development of their communities and States’ as a
contribution to promoting international cooperation among States and between
States and other actors in order to strengthen the capacity of States to address
migration and development opportunities and challenges more effectively,
“Recognizing the cultural and economic contributions made by migrants
to receiving societies and their communities of origin, as well as the need to
identify appropriate means of maximizing development benefits and
responding to the challenges that migration poses to countries of origin, transit
and destination, especially in the light of the impact of the financial and
economic crisis, and committing to ensuring dignified, humane treatment with
applicable protections and to strengthening mechanisms for international
cooperation,
“Emphasizing the global character of the migratory phenomenon, the
importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation and dialogue in
this regard, as appropriate, and the need to protect the human rights of
migrants, particularly at a time in which migration flows have increased in the
globalized economy and take place in a context of new security concerns,
“Recognizing that women migrant workers are important contributors to
social and economic development through the economic and social impacts of
their work on countries of origin and destination, and underlining the value
and dignity of their labour, including the labour of domestic workers,
“Bearing in mind the obligations of States under international law, as
applicable, to exercise due diligence to prevent crimes against migrants and to
investigate and punish perpetrators, and that not doing so violates and impairs
or nullifies the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
victims,
“Affirming that crimes against migrants, including trafficking in persons,
continue to pose a serious challenge and require a concerted international
assessment and response and genuine multilateral cooperation among countries
of origin, transit and destination for their eradication,
“Bearing in mind that policies and initiatives on the issue of migration,
including those that refer to the orderly management of migration, should
promote holistic approaches that take into account the causes and
consequences of the phenomenon, as well as full respect for the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of migrants,
“Stressing the importance of regulations and laws regarding irregular
migration, at all levels of government, being in accordance with theA/67/457/Add.2
27 12-63624
obligations of States under international law, including international human
rights law,
“Stressing also the obligation of States to protect the human rights of
migrants regardless of their migration status, and expressing its concern at
measures which, including in the context of policies aimed at reducing
irregular migration, treat irregular migration as a criminal rather than an
administrative offence where the effect of doing so is to deny migrants full
enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
“Aware that, as criminals take advantage of migratory flows and attempt
to circumvent restrictive immigration policies, migrants become more
vulnerable to, inter alia, kidnapping, extortion, forced labour, sexual
exploitation, physical assault, debt servitude and abandonment,
“Recognizing the contributions of young migrants to countries of origin
and destination, and in that regard encouraging States to consider the specific
circumstances and needs of young migrants,
“Concerned about the large and growing number of migrants, especially
women and children, who place themselves in a vulnerable situation by
attempting to cross international borders without the required travel documents,
and recognizing the obligation of States to respect the human rights of those
migrants,
“Stressing that penalties and the treatment given to irregular migrants
should be commensurate with their infraction,
“Recognizing the importance of having a comprehensive and balanced
approach to international migration, and bearing in mind that migration
enriches the economic, political, social and cultural fabric of States and the
historical and cultural ties that exist among some regions,
“Recognizing also the obligations of countries of origin, transit and
destination under international human rights law,
“Underlining the importance for States, in cooperation with
non-governmental organizations and other relevant stakeholders, to undertake
information campaigns aimed at clarifying opportunities, limitations, risks and
rights in the event of migration, in order to enable everyone to make informed
decisions and to prevent anyone from utilizing dangerous means to cross
international borders,
“1. Calls upon States to effectively promote and protect the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their migration
status, especially those of women and children, and to address international
migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue
and through a comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles
and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting
and protecting the human rights of all migrants, and avoiding approaches that
might aggravate their vulnerability;
“2. Expresses its concern about the impact of financial and economic
crises on international migration and migrants, and in that regard urgesA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 28
Governments to combat unfair and discriminatory treatment of migrants, in
particular migrant workers and their families;
“3. Reaffirms the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the obligations of States under the International Covenants on
Human Rights, and in this regard:
“(a) Strongly condemns the manifestations and acts of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against migrants and the
stereotypes often applied to them, including on the basis of religion or belief,
and urges States to apply and, where needed, reinforce the existing laws when
xenophobic or intolerant acts, manifestations or expressions against migrants
occur, in order to eradicate impunity for those who commit xenophobic and
racist acts;
“(b) Expresses concern about legislation adopted by some States that
results in measures and practices that may restrict the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of migrants, and reaffirms that, when exercising their
sovereign right to enact and implement migratory and border security
measures, States have the duty to comply with their obligations under
international law, including international human rights law, in order to ensure
full respect for the human rights of migrants;
“(c) Calls upon States to ensure that their laws and policies, including in
the areas of counter-terrorism and combating transnational organized crime,
such as trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, fully respect the
human rights of migrants;
“(d) Calls upon States that have not done so to consider signing and
ratifying or acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families as a matter of
priority, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to promote
and raise awareness of the Convention;
“(e) Takes note of the report of the Committee on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families on its fifteenth
and sixteenth sessions;
“4. Also reaffirms the duty of States to effectively promote and protect
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrants, especially those of
women and children, regardless of their immigration status, in conformity with
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international instruments
to which they are party, and therefore:
“(a) Calls upon all States to respect the human rights and the inherent
dignity of migrants and to put an end to arbitrary arrest and detention and,
where necessary, to review detention periods in order to avoid excessive
detention of irregular migrants, and to adopt, where applicable, alternative
measures to detention;
“(b) Urges all States to adopt effective measures to prevent and punish
any form of illegal deprivation of liberty of migrants by individuals or groups;A/67/457/Add.2
29 12-63624
“(c) Notes with appreciation the measures adopted by some States to
reduce detention periods in cases of undocumented migration in the
application of domestic regulations and laws regarding irregular migration;
“(d) Also notes with appreciation the successful implementation by
some States of alternative measures to detention in cases of undocumented
migration as a practice that deserves consideration by all States;
“(e) Requests States to adopt concrete measures to prevent the violation
of the human rights of migrants while in transit, including in ports and airports
and at borders and migration checkpoints, to train public officials who work in
those facilities and in border areas to treat migrants respectfully and in
accordance with the law, and to prosecute, in conformity with applicable law,
any act of violation of the human rights of migrants, inter alia, arbitrary
detention, torture and violations of the right to life, including extrajudicial
executions, during their transit from their country of origin to the country of
destination and vice versa, including their transit through national borders;
“(f) Underlines the right of migrants to return to their country of
citizenship, and recalls that States must ensure that their returning nationals
are duly received;
“(g) Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to ensure full
respect for and observance of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, in
particular with regard to the right of all foreign nationals, regardless of their
immigration status, to communicate with a consular official of the sending
State in case of arrest, imprisonment, custody or detention, and the obligation
of the receiving State to inform the foreign national without delay of his or her
rights under the Convention;
“(h) Requests all States, in conformity with national legislation and
applicable international legal instruments to which they are party, to enforce
labour law effectively, including by addressing violations of such law, with
regard to migrant workers’ labour relations and working conditions, inter alia,
those related to their remuneration and conditions of health, safety at work and
the right to freedom of association;
“(i) Encourages all States to remove unlawful obstacles, where they
exist, that may prevent the safe, transparent, unrestricted and expeditious
transfer of remittances, earnings, assets and pensions of migrants to their
country of origin or to any other countries, in conformity with applicable
legislation and agreements, and to consider, as appropriate, measures to solve
other problems that may impede such transfers;
“(j) Recalls that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes
that everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national
tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted to him or her;
“5. Emphasizes the importance of protecting persons in vulnerable
situations, and in this regard:
“(a) Expresses its concern about the increase in the activities of
transnational and national organized crime entities and others who profit from
crimes against migrants, especially women and children, without regard forA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 30
dangerous and inhumane conditions and in flagrant violation of domestic laws
and international law and contrary to international standards;
“(b) Also expresses its concern about the high level of impunity enjoyed
by traffickers and their accomplices as well as other members of organized
crime entities and, in this context, the denial of rights and justice to migrants
who have suffered from abuse;
“(c) Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries,
that allow migrants to integrate fully into the host countries, facilitate family
reunification and promote a harmonious, tolerant and respectful environment,
and encourages States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of
programmes;
“(d) Calls upon States to implement gender-sensitive policies and
programmes for women migrant workers and to provide safe and legal
channels that recognize their skills and education and fair labour conditions,
facilitate their productive employment and decent work and integration into
the labour force, including in the fields of education and science and
technology, and ensure that all women, including care workers, are legally
protected against violence and exploitation;
“(e) Encourages all States to develop international migration policies
and programmes that include a gender perspective, in order to adopt the
measures necessary to better protect women and girls against dangers and
abuse during migration;
“(f) Calls upon States to protect the human rights of migrant children,
given their vulnerability, particularly unaccompanied migrant children,
ensuring that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in their
policies of integration, return and family reunification;
“(g) Encourages all States to prevent and eliminate discriminatory
policies and legislation, at all levels of government, that deny migrant children
access to education;
“(h) Encourages States, while taking into account the best interests of
the child as a primary consideration, to foster the successful integration of
migrant children into the education system and the removal of barriers to their
education in host countries and countries of origin;
“(i) Urges States to ensure that repatriation mechanisms allow for the
identification and special protection of persons in vulnerable situations,
including persons with disabilities, and take into account, in conformity with
their international obligations and commitments, the principle of the best
interests of the child and family reunification;
“(j) Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and supplementing protocols thereto, namely,
the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, to implement them fully, and calls upon States that have
not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to them as a matter of priority;A/67/457/Add.2
31 12-63624
“6. Takes note with appreciation of the study of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on challenges and best
practices in the implementation of the international framework for the
protection of the rights of the child in the context of migration, and invites
States to take into account the conclusions and recommendations of the study
when designing and implementing their migration policies;
“7. Encourages States to protect victims of national and transnational
organized crime, including kidnapping, trafficking and, in some instances,
smuggling, through, where applicable, the implementation of programmes and
policies that guarantee protection and access to medical, psychosocial and
legal assistance;
“8. Encourages Member States that have not already done so to enact
domestic legislation and to take further effective measures to combat
international trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, recognizing
that these crimes may endanger the lives of migrants or subject them to harm,
servitude or exploitation, which may also include debt bondage, slavery,
sexual exploitation or forced labour, and also encourages Member States to
strengthen international cooperation to combat such trafficking and smuggling;
“9. Stresses the importance of international, regional and bilateral
cooperation in the protection of the human rights of migrants, and therefore:
“(a) Requests all States, international organizations and relevant
stakeholders to take into account in their policies and initiatives on migration
issues the global character of the migratory phenomenon and to give due
consideration to international, regional and bilateral cooperation in this field,
including by undertaking dialogues on migration that include countries of
origin, transit and destination, as well as civil society, including migrants, with
a view to addressing, in a comprehensive manner, inter alia, its causes and
consequences and the challenge of undocumented or irregular migration,
granting priority to the protection of the human rights of migrants;
“(b) Encourages States to take the measures necessary to achieve policy
coherence on migration at the national, regional and international levels,
including by ensuring coordinated child protection policies and systems across
borders that are in full compliance with international human rights law;
“(c) Also encourages States to further strengthen their cooperation in
protecting witnesses in cases of smuggling of migrants and trafficking in
persons;
“(d) Calls upon the United Nations system and other relevant
international organizations and multilateral institutions to enhance their
cooperation in the development of methodologies for the collection and
processing of statistical data on international migration and the situation of
migrants in countries of origin, transit and destination and to assist Member
States in their capacity-building efforts in this regard;
“10. Underlines the need to ensure that the development agenda,
including the post-2015 process, addresses the issue of migration and
development in a comprehensive manner, fully integrating a human rights
perspective and gender mainstreaming, and therefore:A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 32
“(a) Requests Member States, the United Nations system, international
organizations, civil society and all relevant stakeholders, especially the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur of
the Human Rights Council on the human rights of migrants and the Global
Migration Group, to ensure that the High-level Dialogue on International
Migration and Development, which will take place during the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly in 2013, analyses the linkage between
migration and development in a balanced and comprehensive manner that
includes, among others, a human rights perspective;
“(b) Recommends that the Chair of the Committee on Migrant Workers
and the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants participate in and
contribute to the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development;
“11. Encourages States, relevant international organizations and civil
society, including non-governmental organizations, to continue and to enhance
their dialogue, including through participation in all relevant international
meetings, including the High-level Dialogue to be held in 2013, with a view to
strengthening public policies aimed at promoting and respecting human rights,
including those of migrants;
“12. Invites the Chair of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to present an oral
report on the work of the Committee and to engage in an interactive dialogue
with the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, under the item entitled
‘Promotion and protection of human rights’, as a way to enhance
communication between the Assembly and the Committee;
“13. Invites the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants to
submit his report to the General Assembly and to engage in an interactive
dialogue at its sixty-eighth session, under the item entitled ‘Promotion and
protection of human rights’;
“14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, submitted to the
General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, on the implementation of
resolution 66/172 and on how the International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families has
influenced policy and practice, where applicable, to strengthen the protection
of migrants;
“15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its sixty-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution and to include in that report an analysis of international migration
and development from a human rights perspective.”
80. At its 48th meeting, on 28 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution entitled “Protection of migrants” (A/C.3/67/L.40/Rev.1), submitted
by the sponsors of draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.40, joined by Belarus, Brazil, Egypt,
Peru and Portugal.
81. At the same meeting, the representative of Mexico orally revised the draft
resolution as follows:A/67/457/Add.2
33 12-63624
(a) In the fifteenth preambular paragraph, the words “to be held in Mauritius
on 21 and 22 November 2012, will draw together” were replaced by the words “held
in Mauritius on 21 and 22 November 2012, drew together”;
(b) In the eighteenth preambular paragraph, the words “in countries of origin
and destination” were inserted after the words “social and economic development”,
and the words on countries of origin and destination” were deleted after the words
“impacts of their work”;
(c) Operative paragraph 5 (d), which read:
“(d) Calls upon States that have not already done so to implement
gender-sensitive policies and programmes for women migrant workers, to
provide for the protection of their human rights, to promote fair labour
conditions and to ensure that all women, including care workers, are legally
protected against violence and exploitation”,
was replaced by:
“(d) Calls upon States that have not already done so to provide for the
protection of the human rights of women migrant workers, to promote fair
labour conditions and to ensure that all women, including care workers, are
legally protected against violence and exploitation”;
(d) In operative paragraph 5 (e), the words “to implement gender-sensitive
policies and programmes for women migrant workers”, were inserted after the
words “Encourages States”;
(e) Operative paragraph 10 (b), which read:
“(b) Recognizes the importance of the contribution of the Chair of the
Committee on Migrant Workers and the Special Rapporteur on the human
rights of migrants, as well as key development actors, to the High-level
Dialogue on International Migration and Development”,
was replaced by:
“(b) Recognizes the importance of the contribution of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Chair of the Committee on Migrant
Workers and the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, as well
as key development actors, to the discussion at the High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development”.
82. Also at its 48th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.40/Rev.1, as orally revised (see para. 137, draft resolution XI).
L. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.41
83. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, China, Cuba, Ecuador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Jordan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Somalia, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkmenistan and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), introduced a draft resolution entitled
“Promotion of peace as a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of all humanA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 34
rights by all” (A/C.3/67/L.41). Subsequently, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Burundi,
Cameroon, the Comoros, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, El Salvador, Grenada, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, the Niger, Senegal, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Swaziland, Vanuatu, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
84. At its 48th meeting, on 28 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.41 by a recorded vote of 121 to 53, with 5 abstentions (see para. 137,
draft resolution XII). The voting was as follows:5
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Armenia, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Singapore.
__________________
5 The delegation of Ethiopia and Turkmenistan subsequently indicated that they had intended to
vote in favour.A/67/457/Add.2
35 12-63624
85. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Cyprus (on
behalf of the European Union) and the United States of America (see
A/C.3/67/SR.48).
M. Draft resolutions A/C.3/67/L.42 and Rev.1
86. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burundi, Cameroon, China, the Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kenya, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, the
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Senegal, Slovenia, Somalia, South Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe, introduced a
draft resolution entitled “The right to food” (A/C.3/67/L.42), which read:
“The General Assembly,
“Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations and its importance for the
promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
“Reaffirming also all previous resolutions and decisions on the right to
food adopted within the framework of the United Nations,
“Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which provides
that everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for her or his health
and well-being, including food, the Universal Declaration on the Eradication
of Hunger and Malnutrition and the United Nations Millennium Declaration, in
particular Millennium Development Goal 1 on eradicating extreme poverty
and hunger by 2015,
“Recalling also the provisions of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in which the fundamental right of every
person to be free from hunger is recognized,
“Bearing in mind the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the
World Food Summit Plan of Action and the Declaration of the World Food
Summit: five years later, adopted in Rome on 13 June 2002,
“Reaffirming the concrete recommendations contained in the Voluntary
Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate
Food in the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in November 2004,
“Reaffirming also the Five Rome Principles for Sustainable Global Food
Security contained in the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security,
adopted in Rome on 16 November 2009,
“Reaffirming further that all human rights are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, and that they must be treated globally, in a fair
and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 36
“Reaffirming that a peaceful, stable and enabling political, social and
economic environment, at both the national and the international levels, is the
essential foundation that will enable States to give adequate priority to food
security and poverty eradication,
“Reiterating, as in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the
Declaration of the World Food Summit, that food should not be used as an
instrument of political or economic pressure, and reaffirming in this regard the
importance of international cooperation and solidarity, as well as the necessity
of refraining from unilateral measures that are not in accordance with
international law and the Charter and that endanger food security,
“Convinced that each State must adopt a strategy consistent with its
resources and capacities to achieve its individual goals in implementing the
recommendations contained in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security
and the World Food Summit Plan of Action and, at the same time, cooperate
regionally and internationally in order to organize collective solutions to
global issues of food security in a world of increasingly interlinked institutions,
societies and economies where coordinated efforts and shared responsibilities
are essential,
“Recognizing that the complex character of the global food crisis, in
which the right to adequate food is threatened to be violated on a massive scale,
is a combination of several major factors, such as the global financial and
economic crisis, environmental degradation, desertification and the impacts of
global climate change, as well as natural disasters and the lack, in many
countries, of the appropriate technology, investment and capacity-building
necessary to confront its impact, particularly in developing countries, least
developed countries and small island developing States,
“Resolved to act to ensure that the human rights perspective is taken into
account at the national, regional and international levels in measures to
address the global food crisis,
“Expressing its deep concern at the number and the scale of natural
disasters, diseases and pest infestations, as well as the negative impact of
climate change, and their increasing impact in recent years, which have
resulted in substantial loss of life and livelihood and threatened agricultural
production and food security, in particular in developing countries,
“Stressing the importance of reversing the continuing decline of official
development assistance devoted to agriculture, both in real terms and as a
share of total official development assistance,
“Recognizing the importance of the protection and preservation of
agrobiodiversity in guaranteeing food security and the right to food for all,
“Recognizing also the role of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations as the key United Nations agency for rural and agricultural
development and its work in supporting the efforts of Member States to
achieve the full realization of the right to food, including through its provision
of technical assistance to developing countries in support of the
implementation of national priority frameworks,A/67/457/Add.2
37 12-63624
“Taking note of the final Declaration adopted at the International
Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in Porto Alegre, Brazil, on
10 March 2006,
“Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled ‘The future we want’, adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 66/288,
“Acknowledging the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security
Crisis established by the Secretary-General, and supporting the Secretary-
General in his continuing efforts in this regard, including continued
engagement with Member States and the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on the right to food,
“1. Reaffirms that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of
human dignity and therefore requires the adoption of urgent measures at the
national, regional and international levels for its elimination;
“2. Also reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to safe,
sufficient and nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and
the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to
fully develop and maintain his or her physical and mental capacities;
“3. Considers it intolerable that, as estimated by the United Nations
Children’s Fund, more than one third of the children who die every year before
the age of 5 do so from hunger-related illness, that, as estimated by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the number of people who
are undernourished is about 870 million worldwide, and that an additional
1 billion people are suffering from serious malnutrition, including as a result
of the global food crisis, while, according to the latter organization, the planet
could produce enough food to feed everyone around the world;
“4. Expresses its concern at the fact that the effects of the world food
crisis continue to have serious consequences for the poorest and most
vulnerable people, particularly in developing countries, which have been
further aggravated by the world financial and economic crisis, and at the
particular effects of this crisis on many net food-importing countries,
especially on least developed countries;
“5. Expresses its deep concern that, according to the report of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, entitled The State of Food
Insecurity in the World 2012, 98 per cent of undernourished people in the
world live in developing countries;
“6. Expresses its concern that women and girls are disproportionately
affected by hunger, food insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of gender
inequality and discrimination, that in many countries girls are twice as likely
as boys to die from malnutrition and preventable childhood diseases and that it
is estimated that almost twice as many women as men suffer from
malnutrition;
“7. Encourages all States to take action to address gender inequality
and discrimination against women, in particular where it contributes to the
malnutrition of women and girls, including measures to ensure the full andA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 38
equal realization of the right to food and ensuring that women have equal
access to resources, including income, land and water and their ownership, as
well as full and equal access to education, science and technology, to enable
them to feed themselves and their families;
“8. Encourages the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on the right to food to continue mainstreaming a gender perspective in the
fulfilment of his mandate, and encourages the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and all other United Nations bodies and
mechanisms addressing the right to food and food insecurity to integrate a
gender perspective into their relevant policies, programmes and activities;
“9. Reaffirms the need to ensure that programmes delivering safe and
nutritious food are inclusive of and accessible to persons with disabilities;
“10. Encourages all States to take steps with a view to progressively
achieving the full realization of the right to food, including steps to promote
the conditions for everyone to be free from hunger and, as soon as possible, to
enjoy fully the right to food, and to create and adopt national plans to combat
hunger;
“11. Recognizes the advances reached through South-South cooperation
in developing countries and regions in connection with food security and the
development of agricultural production for the full realization of the right to
food;
“12. Stresses that improving access to productive resources and public
investment in rural development are essential for eradicating hunger and
poverty, in particular in developing countries, including through the promotion
of investments in appropriate small-scale irrigation and water management
technologies in order to reduce vulnerability to droughts;
“13. Recognizes the critical contribution made by the fisheries sector to
the realization of the right to food and to food security;
“14. Recognizes that 80 per cent of hungry people live in rural areas and
50 per cent are small-scale farm-holders, and that these people are especially
vulnerable to food insecurity, given the increasing cost of inputs and the fall in
farm incomes; that access to land, water, seeds and other natural resources is
an increasing challenge for poor producers; that sustainable and gender-
sensitive agricultural policies are important tools for promoting land and
agrarian reform, rural credit and insurance, technical assistance and other
associated measures to achieve food security and rural development; and that
support by States for small farmers, fishing communities and local enterprises,
including through the facilitation of access of their products to national and
international markets and empowerment of small producers, particularly
women, in value chains, is a key element for food security and the provision of
the right to food;
“15. Stresses the importance of fighting hunger in rural areas, including
through national efforts supported by international partnerships to stop
desertification and land degradation and through investments and public
policies that are specifically appropriate to the risk of drylands, and in this
regard calls for the full implementation of the United Nations Convention toA/67/457/Add.2
39 12-63624
Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought
and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa;
“16. Urges States that have not yet done so to favourably consider
becoming parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity and to consider
becoming parties to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for
Food and Agriculture as a matter of priority;
“17. Recalls the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, acknowledges that many indigenous organizations and representatives
of indigenous peoples have expressed, in different forums, their deep concerns
over the obstacles and challenges they face in achieving the full enjoyment of
the right to food, and calls upon States to take special actions to combat the
root causes of the disproportionately high level of hunger and malnutrition
among indigenous peoples and the continuous discrimination against them;
“18. Notes the need to further examine various concepts such as, inter
alia, ‘food sovereignty’ and their relation with food security and the right to
food, bearing in mind the need to avoid any negative impact on the enjoyment
of the right to food for all people at all times;
“19. Requests all States and private actors, as well as international
organizations within their respective mandates, to take fully into account the
need to promote the effective realization of the right to food for all, including
in the ongoing negotiations in different fields;
“20. Recognizes the need to strengthen national commitment as well as
international assistance, upon the request of and in cooperation with the
affected countries, towards the full realization and protection of the right to
food, and in particular to develop national protection mechanisms for people
forced to leave their homes and land because of hunger or humanitarian
emergencies affecting the enjoyment of the right to food;
“21. Stresses the need to make efforts to mobilize and optimize the
allocation and utilization of technical and financial resources from all sources,
including external debt relief for developing countries, and to reinforce
national actions to implement sustainable food security policies;
“22. Calls for the early conclusion and a successful, development-
oriented outcome of the Doha Round of trade negotiations of the World Trade
Organization as a contribution to creating international conditions that permit
the full realization of the right to food;
“23. Stresses that all States should make all efforts to ensure that their
international policies of a political and economic nature, including
international trade agreements, do not have a negative impact on the right to
food in other countries;
“24. Recalls the importance of the New York Declaration on Action
against Hunger and Poverty, and recommends the continuation of efforts aimed
at identifying additional sources of financing for the fight against hunger and
poverty;
“25. Recognizes that the promises made at the World Food Summit in
1996 to halve the number of persons who are undernourished are not beingA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 40
fulfilled, while recognizing the efforts of Member States in this regard, and
once again invites all international financial and development institutions, as
well as the relevant United Nations agencies and funds, to give priority to and
provide the necessary funding to realize the aim of halving by 2015 the
proportion of people who suffer from hunger, as well as the right to food as set
out in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the United Nations
Millennium Declaration;
“26. Reaffirms that integrating food and nutritional support, with the
goal that all people at all times will have access to sufficient, safe and
nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active
and healthy life, is part of a comprehensive effort to improve public health,
including the response to the spread of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and
other communicable diseases;
“27. Urges States to give adequate priority in their development
strategies and expenditures to the realization of the right to food;
“28. Stresses the importance of international cooperation and
development assistance as an effective contribution both to the expansion and
improvement of agriculture and its environmental sustainability, food
production, breeding projects on diversity of crops and livestock, and
institutional innovations such as community seed banks, farmer field schools
and seed fairs and to the provision of humanitarian food assistance in activities
related to emergency situations, for the realization of the right to food and the
achievement of sustainable food security, while recognizing that each country
has the primary responsibility for ensuring the implementation of national
programmes and strategies in this regard;
“29. Also stresses that States parties to the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights should
consider implementing that agreement in a manner that is supportive of food
security, while being mindful of the obligation of Member States to promote
and protect the right to food;
“30. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other
relevant stakeholders to support national efforts aimed at responding rapidly to
the food crises currently occurring across Africa, in particular in the Horn of
Africa, and expresses its deep concern that funding shortfalls are forcing the
World Food Programme to cut operations across different regions, including
Southern Africa;
“31. Invites all relevant international organizations, including the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund, to continue to promote policies and
projects that have a positive impact on the right to food, to ensure that partners
respect the right to food in the implementation of common projects, to support
strategies of Member States aimed at the fulfilment of the right to food and to
avoid any actions that could have a negative impact on the realization of the
right to food;
“32. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special
Rapporteur;A/67/457/Add.2
41 12-63624
“33. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur,
as extended by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 13/4 of 24 March
2010;
“34. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide all the human and
financial resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur;
“35. Welcomes the work already done by the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights in promoting the right to adequate food, in
particular its General Comment No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food
(article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights), in which the Committee affirmed, inter alia, that the right to adequate
food is indivisibly linked to the inherent dignity of the human person and is
indispensable for the fulfilment of other human rights enshrined in the
International Bill of Human Rights, and is also inseparable from social justice,
requiring the adoption of appropriate economic, environmental and social
policies, at both the national and the international levels, oriented to the
eradication of poverty and the fulfilment of all human rights for all;
“36. Recalls General Comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on the right to water (articles 11 and 12
of the Covenant), in which the Committee noted, inter alia, the importance of
ensuring sustainable access to water resources for human consumption and
agriculture in realization of the right to adequate food;
“37. Reaffirms that the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive
Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food
Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations in November 2004, represent a practical tool to promote
the realization of the right to food for all, contribute to the achievement of
food security and thus provide an additional instrument in the attainment of
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the
United Nations Millennium Declaration;
“38. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special
Rapporteur in his task, to supply all necessary information requested by him
and to give serious consideration to responding favourably to the requests of
the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his
mandate more effectively;
“39. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly
at its sixty-eighth session an interim report on the implementation of the
present resolution and to continue his work, including by examining the
emerging issues with regard to the realization of the right to food within his
existing mandate;
“40. Invites Governments, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, treaty bodies, civil society actors and non-governmental
organizations, as well as the private sector, to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur in the fulfilment of his mandate, inter alia, through the submission
of comments and suggestions on ways and means of realizing the right to food;A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 42
“41. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its sixty-
eighth session under the item entitled ‘Promotion and protection of human
rights’.”
87. At its 48th meeting, on 28 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution entitled “The right to food” (A/C.3/67/L.42/Rev.1), submitted by the
sponsors of draft resolutions A/C.3/67/L.42 and Australia, Burkina Faso, Chile, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia and the Sudan.
Subsequently, Afghanistan, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Cambodia,
the Central African Republic, the Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nauru,
Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Yemen and Zambia
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
88. At the same meeting, the representative of Cuba orally revised the draft
resolution as follows:
(a) In the twelfth preambular paragraph, the words “on a massive scale”
were replaced by the words “on a substantive scale”;
(b) After the fifteenth preambular paragraph, a new preambular paragraph
was added reading:
“Recalling the adoption of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible
Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of
National Food Security, at the thirty-eighth session of the Committee on World
Food Security, held on 11 May 2012, and the 144th session of the Council of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations”;
(c) After operative paragraph 9, a new operative paragraph 10 was added,
reading:
“10. Calls upon all States and, if appropriate, relevant international
organizations to take measures and support programmes which are aimed at
combating undernutrition in mothers and children and the irreversible effects
of chronic undernutrition in early childhood, in particular from pregnancy to
the age of two years”
and the subsequent paragraphs were renumbered accordingly;
(d) At the end of operative paragraph 25 (former paragraph 24), the words
“as well as non-communicable diseases” were added.
89. Also at its 48th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.42/Rev.1, as orally revised (see para. 137, draft resolution XIII).A/67/457/Add.2
43 12-63624
90. After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of the United States of America and Canada (see A/C.3/67/SR.48).
N. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.43
91. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of
Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Somalia,
South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and
Viet Nam, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Promotion of a democratic and
equitable international order” (A/C.3/67/L.43). Subsequently, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, the Comoros, the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ghana, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Lesotho, Malaysia, Malawi, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Senegal, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, Swaziland, Vanuatu and Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
92. At the 48th meeting, on 28 November, representative of Cuba made a
statement (see A/C.3/67/SR.48).
93. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.43 by
a recorded vote of 121 to 52, with 7 abstentions (see para. 137, draft resolution XIV).
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Island,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 44
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico, Mozambique, Peru, Samoa.
94. Before the vote, the representative of Cyprus made a statement on behalf of
the European Union (see A/C.3/67/SR.48).
O. Draft resolutions A/C.3/67/L.44 and Rev.1 and amendments
thereto contained in documents A/C.3/67/L.62 to L.66
95. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of Croatia, on behalf
of Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, the Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, the Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Vanuatu, introduced a draft
resolution (A/C.3/67/L.44) entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”,
which read:
“The General Assembly,
“Guided by the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations,
“Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child,
“Recalling that capital punishment shall not be imposed for offences
committed by persons below eighteen years of age,
“Reaffirming its resolutions 62/149 of 18 December 2007, 63/168 of
18 December 2008 and 65/206 of 21 December 2010 on the question of a
moratorium on the use of the death penalty, in which the General Assembly
called upon States that still maintain the death penalty to establish a
moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing it,
“Welcoming Human Rights Council decision 18/117 of 28 September
2011,A/67/457/Add.2
45 12-63624
“Mindful that any miscarriage or failure of justice in the implementation
of the death penalty is irreversible and irreparable,
“Convinced that a moratorium on the use of the death penalty contributes
to respect for human dignity and to the enhancement and progressive
development of human rights, and considering that there is no conclusive
evidence of the deterrent value of the death penalty,
“Noting ongoing local and national debates and regional initiatives on the
death penalty, as well as the readiness of an increasing number of Member
States to make available to the public information on the use of the death
penalty,
“Noting also the technical cooperation among Member States in relation
to moratoriums on the death penalty,
“1. Expresses its deep concern about the continued application of the
death penalty;
“2. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 65/206 and the recommendations contained
therein;
“3. Also welcomes the steps taken by some Member States to reduce the
number of offences for which the death penalty may be imposed and the
decisions made by an increasing number of States, at all levels of Government,
to apply a moratorium on executions, followed in many cases by the abolition
of the death penalty;
“4. Calls upon all States:
“(a) To respect international standards that provide safeguards
guaranteeing protection of the rights of those facing the death penalty, in
particular the minimum standards, as set out in the annex to Economic and
Social Council resolution 1984/50 of 25 May 1984, as well as to provide the
Secretary-General with information in this regard;
“(b) To make available relevant information with regard to their use of
the death penalty, inter alia, the number of persons sentenced to death, the
number of persons on death row and the number of executions carried out,
which can contribute to possible informed and transparent national and
international debates, including on the obligations of States pertaining to the
use of the death penalty;
“(c) To progressively restrict the use of the death penalty and not to
impose capital punishment for offences committed by persons below eighteen
years of age, pregnant women and persons with mental disabilities;
“(d) To reduce the number of offences for which the death penalty may
be imposed and to consider repealing its mandatory imposition;
“(e) To establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing
the death penalty;
“5. Calls upon States which have abolished the death penalty not to
reintroduce it, and encourages them to share their experience in this regard;A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 46
“6. Also calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider
acceding to or ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death
penalty;
“7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its sixty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
“8. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its sixty-ninth
session under the item entitled ‘Promotion and protection of human rights’.
96. At its 40th meeting, on 19 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution, entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”
(A/C.3/67/L.44/Rev.1), submitted by the sponsors of draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.44
and South Africa. Subsequently, the Dominican Republic, Madagascar, the Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Tuvalu and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
97. At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of Egypt,
Grenada and China (see A/C.3/67/SR.40).
Action on amendments to draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.44/Rev.1
98. At its 40th meeting, the Committee took action on proposed amendments to
draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.44/Rev.1, which were submitted in documents
A/C.3/67/L.62 to L.66, as set out below.
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/67/L.62
99. The representative of Egypt, on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Egypt, Eritrea, Kuwait, Malaysia, Singapore, the Sudan,
Uganda and Viet Nam, introduced the amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.44/Rev.1 contained in document A/C.3/67/L.62, by which a new
preambular paragraph would be inserted after the second preambular paragraph,
reading:
“Reaffirming the sovereign rights of Member States, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, and urging all Member States to implement
their obligations under international human rights instruments”.
100. At its 40th meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/67/L.62 by a recorded vote of 84 to 63, with 29 abstentions. The
voting was as follows:6
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cameroon, China, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
__________________
6 The delegation of Armenia subsequently indicated that it had intended to abstain.A/67/457/Add.2
47 12-63624
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Democratic Republic of the Congo, El
Salvador, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Nauru, Niger,
Nigeria, Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
101. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Singapore,
Pakistan, Gabon, Argentina and Egypt; after the vote, the representative of the
Sudan made a statement (see A/C.3/67/SR.40).
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/67/L.63
102. The representative of Singapore, on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, China, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Malaysia, Singapore,
Uganda and Viet Nam, introduced the amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.44/Rev.1 contained in document A/C.3/67/L.63, by which a new
operative paragraph would be inserted after operative paragraph 1, reading:
“Reaffirms the sovereign right of all countries to develop their own legal
systems, including determining appropriate legal penalties, in accordance with
their obligations under international law”.
103. At its 40th meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/67/L.63 by a recorded vote of 83 to 61, with 31 abstentions. The
voting was as follows:6
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, China, Comoros, Congo,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 48
Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, El Salvador, Fiji, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nauru, Niger, Nigeria, Republic of Korea,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Tajikistan, United
Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
104. Statements were made by the representatives of Cyprus, Egypt, Albania, India
and Pakistan (see A/C.3/67/SR.40).
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/67/L.64
105. The representative of Antigua and Barbuda, on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Egypt, Malaysia, Singapore, Uganda and Viet Nam,
introduced the amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.44/Rev.1 contained in
document A/C.3/67/L.64, by which operative paragraph 4 (b) would be replaced by:
“To make available relevant information with regard to their use of the
death penalty, which can contribute to possible informed and transparent
national debates”.
106. At the same meeting, the representative of Antigua and Barbuda orally revised
the amendment so that it read:
“To make available, as appropriate, information with regard to their use
of the death penalty, which can contribute to possible informed and transparent
national debates”.A/67/457/Add.2
49 12-63624
107. At its 40th meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/67/L.64, as orally revised, by a recorded vote of 80 to 54, with 37
abstentions. The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Grenada, Guyana, India, Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of America,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, China, Cote d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, El Salvador, Fiji, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Nauru, Niger, Nigeria, Republic of
Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan,
Tajikistan, Thailand, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
108. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Brazil and
Switzerland (see A/C.3/67/SR.40).
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/67/L.65
109. The representative of Trinidad and Tobago, on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Egypt, Malaysia, Singapore, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda and Viet Nam, introduced the amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.44/Rev.1 contained in document A/C.3/67/L.65, by which a new
subparagraph would be inserted after operative paragraph 4 (d), reading:
“To restrict the crimes for which the death penalty may be imposed to the most
serious crimes, pursuant to a final judgement rendered by a competent court, in
accordance with the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence”.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 50
110. At its 40th meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/67/L.65 by a recorded vote of 86 to 53, with 35 abstentions. The
voting was as follows:
In favour:
Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cote d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Comoros, Congo, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, El Salvador, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Maldives, Mauritania,
Morocco, Namibia, Nauru, Niger, Nigeria, Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Tajikistan, United
Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
111. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Botswana,
New Zealand, Mexico and Egypt (see A/C.3/67/SR.40).
Amendment contained in document A/C.3/67/L.66
112. The representative of Botswana, on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Egypt, Malaysia, Singapore, Uganda and Viet Nam, introduced
the amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.44/Rev.1 contained in document
A/C.3/67/L.66, by which a new subparagraph would be inserted before operative
paragraph 4 (e), reading:
“To comply with their obligations under relevant provisions of international
human rights instruments, and to pay due regard to the provisions contained inA/67/457/Add.2
51 12-63624
articles 6, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and articles 37 and 40 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
while bearing in mind relevant international safeguards and guarantees,
including the right to seek pardon or commutation of sentence”.
113. At its 40th meeting, the Committee rejected the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/67/L.66 by a recorded vote of 85 to 55, with 35 abstentions. The
voting was as follows:
In favour:
Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cameroon, Congo, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Namibia, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, China, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Djibouti, El Salvador, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Maldives, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nauru, Niger, Nigeria, Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Tajikistan, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Zambia.
114. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of India, Egypt,
Serbia and the Federated States of Micronesia; after the vote, the representative of
Botswana made a statement (see A/C.3/67/SR.40).A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 52
Action on draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.44/Rev.1 as a whole
115. At its 40th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.44/Rev.1 by a recorded vote of 110 to 39, with 36 abstentions (see
para. 137, draft resolution XV). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Against:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Japan, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia, Mauritania, Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, United States of America, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Bahrain, Belarus, Cameroon, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, Fiji, Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia,
Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Malawi, Maldives, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Republic
of Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Thailand, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam,
Zambia.
116. Before the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Croatia, India,
Papua New Guinea, the Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam, Singapore and the Sudan;
after the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Malaysia, Indonesia,
Bangladesh, Suriname, Japan, Morocco, Cuba, Egypt, the United States of America
and Botswana (see A/C.3/67/SR.40).A/67/457/Add.2
53 12-63624
P. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.45
117. At the 36th meeting, on 13 November, the representative of Denmark, on
behalf of Albania, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, France, Guatemala, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Mali, Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey, introduced a
draft resolution entitled “Committee against Torture” (A/C.3/67/L.45). Subsequently,
Argentina, Armenia, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Georgia,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Malta, the
Netherlands, Peru, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Ukraine, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of) joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
118. At the 42nd meeting, on 20 November, the attention of the Committee was
drawn to a statement of the programme budget implications of the draft resolution,
contained in document A/C.3/67/L.60.
119. At the same meeting, the representative of Denmark orally revised operative
paragraph 1 of the draft resolution by replacing the words “encourages the
Committee” with the words “urges the Committee”.
120. Also at its 42nd meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.45, as orally revised (see para. 137, draft resolution XVI).
121. After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland (also on behalf of Japan) and Japan (see
A/C.3/67/SR.42).
Q. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.46
122. At the 41st meeting, on 20 November, the representative of Azerbaijan, on
behalf of Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Benin, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia, Guatemala, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Madagascar, Nigeria, Panama, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Sudan,
Switzerland, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, the United States of America and
Uzbekistan, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Missing persons”
(A/C.3/67/L.46). Subsequently, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Haiti, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Montenegro,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
123. At the 48th meeting, on 28 November, the representative of Azerbaijan made a
statement (see A/C.3/67/SR.48).
124. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.46
(see para. 137, draft resolution XVII).A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 54
R. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.47
125. At the 43rd meeting, on 26 November, the representative of the United Arab
Emirates, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, as well as the
Dominican Republic, subsequently joined by Australia, Brazil, New Zealand,
Thailand and Uruguay, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Combating intolerance,
negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and
violence against persons, based on religion or belief” (A/C.3/67/L.47), which read:
“The General Assembly,
“Reaffirming the commitment made by all States under the Charter of the
United Nations to promote and encourage universal respect for and observance
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as to, inter
alia, religion or belief,
“Reaffirming also the obligation of States to prohibit discrimination,
hostility and violence on the basis of religion or belief and to implement
measures to guarantee the equal and effective protection of the law,
“Reaffirming further that all human rights are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated,
“Reaffirming that the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights provides, inter alia, that everyone shall have the right to freedom of
thought, conscience and religion or belief, which shall include freedom to have
or to adopt a religion or belief of one’s choice and freedom, either alone or in
community with others and in public or private, to manifest one’s religion or
belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching,
“Reaffirming also that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression
carries with it special duties and responsibilities, in accordance with article 19 (3)
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
“Recognizing the responsibility of democratic societies to prevent
provocative portrayals of objects of religious veneration that can result in
‘malicious violation of the spirit of tolerance’,
“Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
“Welcoming Human Rights Council resolutions 16/18 of 24 March 2011
and 19/25 of 23 March 2012 and General Assembly resolution 66/167 of
19 December 2011,
“Reaffirming the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression and full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and
impart information can play in strengthening democracy and combating
religious intolerance,
“Deeply concerned about incidents of intolerance, discrimination and
violence against persons based on their religion or belief in all regions of the
world,
“Deploring any advocacy of discrimination or violence on the basis of
religion or belief,A/67/457/Add.2
55 12-63624
“Strongly deploring all acts of violence against persons on the basis of
their religion or belief, as well as any such acts directed against their homes,
businesses, properties, schools, cultural centres or places of worship,
“Strongly deploring, further, all attacks on and in religious places, sites
and shrines in violation of international law, in particular human rights law and
international humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of relics
and monuments,
“Concerned about actions that wilfully exploit tensions or target
individuals on the basis of their religion or belief,
“Deeply alarmed at the instances of intolerance, discrimination and acts
of violence occurring in many parts of the world, including cases motivated by
discrimination against persons belonging to religious minorities, in addition to
the negative projection of the followers of religions and the enforcement of
measures that specifically discriminate against persons on the basis of religion
or belief,
“Expressing concern at the growing manifestations of intolerance based
on religion or belief that can generate hatred and violence among individuals
composing different nations and have serious implications for international
peace and security, and in this regard emphasizing the importance of respect
for religious and cultural diversity, as well as interfaith and intercultural
dialogue aimed at promoting a culture of tolerance and respect among
individuals, societies and nations,
“Recognizing the valuable contribution of people of all religions or
beliefs to humanity and the contribution that dialogue among religious groups
can make towards an improved awareness and understanding of the common
values shared by all humankind,
“Underlining the fact that States, regional organizations, non-
governmental organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important
role to play in promoting tolerance and respect for religious and cultural
diversity and in the universal promotion and protection of human rights,
including freedom of religion or belief,
“Underlining also the importance of raising awareness about different
cultures and religions and of education in the promotion of tolerance, which
involves the acceptance by the public of and its respect for religious and
cultural diversity, including with regard to religious expression, and
underlining further the fact that education, in particular at school, should
contribute in a meaningful way to promoting tolerance and the elimination of
discrimination based on religion or belief,
“Recognizing that working together to enhance the implementation of
existing legal regimes that protect individuals against discrimination and hate
crimes, increase interfaith and intercultural efforts and expand human rights
education is an important first step in combating incidents of intolerance,
discrimination and violence against individuals on the basis of religion or
belief,
“Welcoming the inauguration of the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue in Vienna, onA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 56
the basis of the purposes and principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, and acknowledging the important role that the Centre is
expected to play as a platform for the enhancement of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue,
“Welcoming also, in this regard, all international, regional and national
initiatives aimed at promoting interreligious, intercultural and interfaith
harmony and combating discrimination against individuals on the basis of
religion or belief, including recent initiatives of the chairmanship of Albania of
the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe under the theme ‘United
in diversity’ and taking note of the holding of five regional workshops on
related issues, in Austria, Chile, Kenya, Morocco and Thailand, by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
“1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on combating
intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement
to violence and violence against persons, based on religion or belief, submitted
in accordance with its resolution 66/167;
“2. Expresses deep concern at the continued serious instances of
derogatory stereotyping, negative profiling and stigmatization of persons based
on their religion or belief, as well as programmes and agendas pursued by
extremist individuals, organizations and groups aimed at creating and
perpetuating negative stereotypes about religious groups, in particular when
condoned by Government officials;
“3. Expresses concern that the number of incidents of religious
intolerance, discrimination and related violence, as well as of negative
stereotyping of individuals on the basis of religion or belief, continues to rise
in some parts of the world and to have serious implications for international
peace and security, condemns, in this context, any advocacy of religious hatred
against individuals that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence, and urges States to take effective measures, as set forth in the present
resolution and consistent with their obligations under international human
rights law, to address and combat such incidents;
“4. Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use
of print, audiovisual or electronic media or any other means;
“5. Recognizes that the open public debate of ideas, as well as interfaith
and intercultural dialogue, at the local, national and international levels can be
among the best protections against religious intolerance and can play a
positive role in strengthening democracy and combating religious hatred, and
expresses its conviction that a continuing dialogue on these issues can help to
overcome existing misperceptions;
“6. Also recognizes the strong need for global awareness about the
dangerous implications for international peace and security of incitement to
discrimination and violence based on hate-oriented speech and expression, and
urges all Member States to make renewed efforts to develop educational
systems that promote basic human rights values, including tolerance for
religious and cultural diversity, which is fundamental to promoting tolerance,
peaceful and harmonious multicultural societies;A/67/457/Add.2
57 12-63624
“7. Calls upon all States to take the following actions, as called for by
the Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation to foster a
domestic environment of religious tolerance, peace and respect by:
“(a) Encouraging the creation of collaborative networks to build mutual
understanding, promoting dialogue and inspiring constructive action towards
shared policy goals and the pursuit of tangible outcomes, such as servicing
projects in the fields of education, health, conflict prevention, employment,
integration and media education;
“(b) Creating an appropriate mechanism within Governments to, inter
alia, identify and address potential areas of tension between members of
different religious communities, and assisting with conflict prevention and
mediation;
“(c) Encouraging the training of Government officials in effective
outreach strategies;
“(d) Encouraging the efforts of leaders to discuss within their
communities the causes of discrimination, and developing strategies to counter
those causes;
“(e) Speaking out against intolerance, including advocacy of religious
hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence;
“(f) Adopting measures to criminalize incitement to imminent violence
based on religion or belief;
“(g) Understanding the need to combat denigration and the negative
religious stereotyping of persons, as well as incitement to religious hatred, by
strategizing and harmonizing actions at the local, national, regional and
international levels through, inter alia, education and awareness-raising;
“(h) Recognizing that the open, constructive and respectful debate of
ideas, as well as interfaith and intercultural dialogue at the local, national,
regional and international levels, can play a positive role in combating
religious hatred, incitement and violence;
“8. Calls upon all States:
“(a) To take effective measures to ensure that public functionaries, in
the conduct of their public duties, do not discriminate against an individual on
the basis of religion or belief;
“(b) To foster religious freedom and pluralism by promoting the ability
of members of all religious communities to manifest their religion and to
contribute openly and on an equal footing to society;
“(c) To encourage the representation and meaningful participation of
individuals, irrespective of their religion or belief, in all sectors of society;
“(d) To make a strong effort to counter religious profiling, which is
understood to be the invidious use of religion as a criterion in conducting
questioning, searches and other law enforcement investigative procedures;
“9. Also calls upon all States to adopt measures and policies to promote
full respect for and protection of places of worship and religious sites,A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 58
cemeteries and shrines, and to take protective measures in cases where they are
vulnerable to vandalism or destruction;
“10. Calls for strengthened international efforts to foster a global
dialogue for the promotion of a culture of tolerance and peace at all levels,
based on respect for human rights and diversity of religions and beliefs;
“11. Encourages all States to consider providing updates on efforts made
in this regard as part of ongoing reporting to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and in this respect requests the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to include those updates in her
reports to the Human Rights Council;
“12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its sixty-eighth session a report that includes information provided by the
High Commissioner on steps taken by States to combat intolerance, negative
stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and
violence against persons, based on religion or belief, as set forth in the present
resolution.”
126. At the 48th meeting, on 28 November, the representative of the United Arab
Emirates orally revised the draft resolution (see A/C.3/67/SR.48).
127. At the same meeting, the representative of Cyprus made a statement (on behalf
of the European Union) (see A/C.3/67/SR.48).
128. Also at its 48th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.47, as orally revised (see para. 137, draft resolution XVIII).
129. The representative of the United States of America made a statement (see
A/C.3/67/SR.48).
S. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.48
130. At the 41st meeting, on 20 November, the representative of Cyprus, on behalf
of Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
the Netherlands, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Freedom of religion
or belief” (A/C.3/67/L.48). Subsequently, Burkina Faso, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Japan, Lebanon, Madagascar, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Thailand and Ukraine joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
131. At the 48th meeting, on 28 November, the representative of Cyprus orally
revised the draft resolution as follows:
(a) At the end of the eighth preambular paragraph, the words “and against
individuals who express dissent within their religious communities” were deleted;A/67/457/Add.2
59 12-63624
(b) Operative paragraph 11 (f), which read:
“The exclusion by States of members of some religious minorities from
the protection of the right to freedom of religion or belief”,
was deleted;
(c) At the end of operative paragraph 17, the words “in particular his
comments on the right of conversion as part of freedom of religion or belief” were
deleted.
132. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.48,
as orally revised (see para. 137, draft resolution XIX).
133. The representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran made a statement (see
A/C.3/67/SR.48).
134. After the vote, the representatives of Turkey and Cyprus made statements (see
A/C.3/67/SR.48).
T. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.53
135. At the 38th meeting, on 15 November, the representative of France, on behalf
of Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tunisia, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), introduced a draft resolution
entitled “International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance” (A/C.3/67/L.53). Subsequently, Azerbaijan, Belize, Cameroon,
Canada, the Comoros, Eritrea, Gabon, Grenada, India, Kazakhstan, Mali, Mongolia,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Togo,
Uganda and Zambia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
136. At its 44th meeting, on 26 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.53 (see para. 137, draft resolution XX).A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 60
III. Recommendations of the Third Committee
137. The Third Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
the following draft resolutions:
Draft resolution I
United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation
Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region
The General Assembly,
Guided by the fundamental and universal principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of 1993,1 which
reiterated the need to consider the possibility of establishing regional and
subregional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights where
they do not already exist,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/127 of 16 December 1977, 51/102 of
12 December 1996 and all its subsequent resolutions concerning regional
arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling further its resolution 60/153 of 16 December 2005 on the
establishment of a United Nations human rights training and documentation centre
for South-West Asia and the Arab region,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/51 of 9 March 19932
and all its subsequent resolutions concerning regional arrangements for the
promotion and protection of human rights,
Reaffirming that regional cooperation plays a fundamental role in promoting
and protecting human rights and should reinforce universal human rights, as
contained in international human rights instruments, and their protection,
Welcoming the training activities and regional consultations conducted by the
United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-West
Asia and the Arab Region,
Noting that the developments in the Middle East and North Africa have
generated growing demand for the services of the Centre, which as a result will not
be able to discharge its mandate effectively without the allocation of adequate
resources on an ongoing basis from the regular budget of the United Nations, as
identified in the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights,3
Mindful of the vastness of and the diversity within South-West Asia and the
Arab region,
__________________
1 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
2 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993, Supplement No. 3 and
corrigenda (E/1993/23 and Corr.2, 4 and 5), chap. II, sect. A.
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 36
(A/67/36), para. 71.A/67/457/Add.2
61 12-63624
1. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Human Rights Training
and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region;
2. Notes the support provided for the establishment of the Centre by the
host country;
3. Also notes that the Centre has conducted a number of training activities
and regional consultations on United Nations human rights mechanisms, human
trafficking, media and human rights education;
4. Further notes that the Centre is receiving an increasing number of
requests for training and documentation, including in the Arabic language, which
require additional resources and the reinforcement of its activities;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide funds and human resources
from the regular budget of the United Nations, beginning in the biennium 2014 2015,
to enable the Centre to respond positively and effectively to the growing needs in
South-West Asia and the Arab region, to fulfil its mandate to undertake training and
documentation activities and to support such efforts undertaken within the region by
Governments, United Nations agencies and programmes, national human rights
institutions and non-governmental organizations according to international human
rights standards;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 62
Draft resolution II
The role of the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human
rights institutions in the promotion and protection of human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,2 in which the Conference
reaffirmed the important and constructive role played by national human rights
institutions,
Reaffirming its resolution 65/207 of 21 December 2010 on the role of the
Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights institutions in the promotion
and protection of human rights,
Recalling the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights welcomed by the General Assembly in its
resolution 48/134 of 20 December 1993 and annexed thereto,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights, in particular resolution 66/169 of 19 December 2011,
Welcoming the rapidly growing interest throughout the world in the creation
and strengthening of the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights
institutions, and recognizing the important role that these institutions can play, in
accordance with their mandate, in support of domestic complaint resolution,
Recognizing the role of the existing Ombudsman, whether a male or female,
mediator and other national human rights institutions in the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Underlining the importance of the autonomy and independence of the
Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights institutions, where they exist,
in order to enable them to consider all issues related to their fields of competence,
Considering the role of the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human
rights institutions in promoting good governance in public administrations, as well
as improving their relations with citizens, and in strengthening the delivery of
public services,
Considering also the important role of the existing Ombudsman, mediator and
other national human rights institutions in contributing to the effective realization of
the rule of law and respect for the principles of justice and equality,
Stressing that these institutions, where they exist, can play an important role in
advising the Government with respect to bringing national legislation and national
practices into line with their international human rights obligations,
Stressing also the importance of international cooperation in the field of
human rights, and recalling the role played by regional and international
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.A/67/457/Add.2
63 12-63624
associations of the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights
institutions in promoting cooperation and sharing best practices,
Noting with satisfaction the active work of the Association of Mediterranean
Ombudsmen and the active continuing work of the Ibero American Federation of
Ombudsmen, the Association of Ombudsmen and Mediators of la Francophonie, the
Asian Ombudsman Association, the African Ombudsman and Mediators Association,
the Arab Ombudsman Network, the European Mediation Network Initiative, the
International Ombudsman Institute and other active ombudsman and mediator
associations and networks,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;3
2. Encourages Member States:
(a) To consider the creation or the strengthening of independent and
autonomous ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights institutions at
the national and, where applicable, the local level;
(b) To endow ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights
institutions, where they exist, with an adequate legislative framework and financial
means in order to ensure the efficient and independent exercise of their mandate and
to strengthen the legitimacy and credibility of their actions as mechanisms for the
promotion and protection of human rights;
(c) To develop and conduct, as appropriate, outreach activities at the national
level, in collaboration with all relevant stakeholders, in order to raise awareness of
the important role of the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights
institutions;
3. Recognizes that, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action,2
it is the right of each State to choose the framework for
national institutions, including the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human
rights institutions, which is best suited to its particular needs at the national level, in
order to promote human rights in accordance with international human rights
instruments;
4. Welcomes the active participation of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in all international and regional meetings of
the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights institutions;
5. Encourages the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, through its advisory services, to develop and support activities
dedicated to the existing Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights
institutions and to strengthen their role within national systems for human rights
protection;
6. Encourages the Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights
institutions, where they exist:
(a) To operate, as appropriate, in accordance with the principles relating to
the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights
(“the Paris Principles”)4 and other relevant international instruments, in order to
__________________
3 A/67/288.
4 Resolution 48/134, annex.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 64
strengthen their independence and autonomy and to enhance their capacity to assist
Member States in the promotion and protection of human rights;
(b) To request, in cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, their accreditation by the International
Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection
of Human Rights, in order to enable them to interact effectively with the relevant
human rights bodies of the United Nations system;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.A/67/457/Add.2
65 12-63624
Draft resolution III
Human rights and extreme poverty
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,2
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,3 the Convention on the Rights of the Child,4 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,5
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities6 and other human rights
instruments adopted by the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 47/196 of 22 December 1992, by which it declared
17 October the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, and its resolution
62/205 of 19 December 2007, by which it proclaimed the Second United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017), as well as its resolution 65/214
of 21 December 2010 and its previous resolutions on human rights and extreme
poverty, in which it reaffirmed that extreme poverty and exclusion from society
constitute a violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international
action is therefore required to eliminate them,
Recalling also its resolution 52/134 of 12 December 1997, in which it
recognized that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
rights was essential for the effective understanding, promotion and protection of all
human rights,
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolutions 2/2 of 27 November
2006,7 7/27 of 28 March 2008,8 8/11 of 18 June 2008,9 12/19 of 2 October 200910
and 15/19 of 30 September 2010,11
Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 21/11 of 27 September 2012,12 by
which the Council adopted the guiding principles on extreme poverty and human
rights as a useful tool for States in the formulation and implementation of poverty
reduction and eradication policies, as appropriate,
Reaffirming the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, and welcoming the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, and recalling its
outcome document, contained in resolution 65/1 of 22 September 2010,
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
4 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
5 Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
6 Resolution 61/106, annex I.
7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/62/53), chap. I, sect. A.
8 Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
9 Ibid., chap. III, sect. A.
10 Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/65/53 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect.
A.
11 Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add.1), chap. II.
12 Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No., 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 66
Deeply concerned that extreme poverty persists in all countries of the world,
regardless of their economic, social and cultural situation, and that its extent and its
manifestations, such as hunger, trafficking in human beings, disease, lack of
adequate shelter, illiteracy and hopelessness, are particularly severe in developing
countries, while acknowledging the significant progress made in several parts of the
world in combating extreme poverty,
Deeply concerned also that gender inequality, violence and discrimination
exacerbate extreme poverty, disproportionally impacting women and girls,
Stressing that special attention should be given to children, older persons,
persons with disabilities and indigenous peoples who are living in extreme poverty,
Concerned by the challenges faced today, including those derived from the
financial and economic crisis, the food crisis and ongoing concerns over food
security, as well as the increasing challenges posed by climate change and the loss
of biodiversity, and by their impact on the increase in the number of people living in
extreme poverty and their negative effect on the capacity of all States, especially
developing countries, to fight extreme poverty,
Recognizing that the eradication of extreme poverty is a major challenge
within the process of globalization and requires coordinated and continued policies
through decisive national action and international cooperation,
Recognizing also that social protection systems make a critical contribution to
the realization of human rights for all, in particular for those who are in vulnerable
or marginalized situations and are trapped in poverty and subject to discrimination,
Stressing the necessity of better understanding and addressing the causes and
consequences of extreme poverty,
Reaffirming that, since the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits
the full and effective enjoyment of human rights and may, in some situations,
constitute a threat to the right to life, its immediate alleviation and eventual
eradication must remain a high priority for the international community,
Stressing that respect for all human rights, which are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, is of crucial importance for all policies and
programmes to fight extreme poverty,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and the full and effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing and contribute to the eradication of extreme poverty,
1. Reaffirms that extreme poverty and exclusion from society constitute a
violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international action is
therefore required to eliminate them;
2. Also reaffirms that it is essential for States to foster participation by the
poorest people in the decision-making process in the societies in which they live, in
the promotion of human rights and in efforts to combat extreme poverty and that it
is essential for people living in and affected by poverty and in vulnerable or
marginalized groups or situations to be empowered to organize themselves and to
participate in all aspects of political, economic, social and cultural life, in particular
the planning and implementation of policies that affect them, thus enabling them to
become genuine partners in development;A/67/457/Add.2
67 12-63624
3. Emphasizes that extreme poverty is a major issue to be addressed by
governments, civil society, community-based social organizations and the United
Nations system, including international financial institutions, and in this context
reaffirms that political commitment is a prerequisite for the eradication of poverty;
4. Reaffirms that the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the
full and effective enjoyment of human rights and renders democracy and popular
participation fragile;
5. Recognizes the need to promote respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to address the most pressing social needs of people
living in poverty, including through the design and development of appropriate
mechanisms to strengthen and consolidate democratic institutions and governance;
6. Reaffirms the commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,13 in particular the commitments to spare no effort to fight against
extreme poverty and to achieve development and poverty eradication, including the
commitment to halve, by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income
is less than one United States dollar a day and the proportion of people who suffer
from hunger;
7. Also reaffirms the commitment made at the 2005 World Summit to
eradicate poverty and promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development
and global prosperity for all, including women and girls;14
8. Further reaffirms the commitment made at the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals to
accelerating progress in order to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger by 2015;15
9. Recalls that promoting universal access to social services and providing
social protection floors can make an important contribution to consolidating and
achieving further development gains and that social protection systems that address
and reduce inequality and social exclusion are essential for protecting the gains
made towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, and in this
regard takes note of International Labour Organization recommendation No. 202 on
social protection floors;
10. Encourages States, when designing, implementing, monitoring and
evaluating social protection programmes, to ensure gender mainstreaming and the
promotion and protection of all human rights in accordance with their obligations
under international human rights law, through this process;
11. Also encourages States to take all necessary measures to eliminate
discrimination against all persons, in particular those living in poverty, and to
refrain from adopting any laws, regulations or practices denying or limiting the
enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including economic,
social and cultural rights, and to ensure that people, in particular those living in
poverty, have equal access to justice;
__________________
13 Resolution 55/2.
14 See resolution 60/1.
15 See resolution 65/1.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 68
12. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to strengthen and support South-South
cooperation and triangular cooperation, and stresses that South-South cooperation is
not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South cooperation;
13. Encourages the international community to strengthen its efforts to
address challenges that are contributing to extreme poverty, including those derived
from the financial and economic crisis, the food crisis and ongoing concerns over
food security, as well as the increasing challenges posed by climate change and the
loss of biodiversity in all parts of the world, especially in developing countries, by
enhancing its cooperation to help to build national capacities;
14. Reaffirms the critical role of both formal and informal education in the
achievement of poverty eradication and other development goals as envisaged in the
Millennium Declaration, in particular basic education and training for eradicating
illiteracy, and efforts towards expanded secondary and higher education as well as
vocational education and technical training, especially for girls and women, the
creation of human resources and infrastructure capabilities and the empowerment of
those living in poverty, and in this context reaffirms the Dakar Framework for
Action adopted at the World Education Forum on 28 April 2000,16 and recognizes
the importance of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization strategy for the eradication of poverty, especially extreme poverty, in
supporting the Education for All programmes as a tool to achieve the Millennium
Development Goal of universal primary education by 2015;
15. Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to give high priority to the question of the relationship between extreme
poverty and human rights, and also invites her to further pursue the work in this
area;
16. Calls upon States, United Nations bodies, in particular the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations
Development Programme, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to continue to give appropriate attention to the links between human
rights and extreme poverty, and encourages the private sector and international
financial institutions to proceed likewise;
17. Takes note with appreciation of the guiding principles on extreme
poverty and human rights, adopted by the Human Rights Council in its resolution
21/11 as a useful tool for States in the formulation and implementation of poverty
reduction and eradication policies, as appropriate;
18. Encourages Governments, relevant United Nations bodies, funds and
programmes, specialized agencies, other intergovernmental organizations and
national human rights institutions as well as non-governmental organizations and
non-State actors, including the private sector, to consider the guiding principles in
the formulation and implementation of their policies and measures concerning
persons affected by extreme poverty;
19. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to disseminate the guiding principles, as appropriate;
__________________
16 See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26-28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).A/67/457/Add.2
69 12-63624
20. Welcomes the efforts of entities throughout the United Nations system to
incorporate the Millennium Declaration and the internationally agreed development
goals set out therein into their work;
21. Also welcomes the work undertaken by the Special Rapporteur on
extreme poverty and human rights and her reports, submitted to the General
Assembly at its sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh sessions;17
22. Decides to consider the question further at its sixty-ninth session under
the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”.
__________________
17 See A/66/265 and A/67/278.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 70
Draft resolution IV
Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all
human rights
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
and expressing, in particular, the need to achieve international cooperation in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 as well as the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June 1993,2 the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted
by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001,3 the outcome document of the Durban
Review Conference, adopted in 2009,4 and the political declaration of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action in 2011, entitled “United against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”,5
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights6 and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,6
Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration 7 and the outcome
documents of the twenty-third8 and twenty-fourth9 special sessions of the General
Assembly, held in New York from 5 to 10 June 2000 and in Geneva from 26 June to
1 July 2000, respectively,
Recalling also its resolutions 66/161 and 66/154 of 19 December 2011,
Recalling further Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/17 of 14 April
2005 on globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights,10
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 17/4 of 16 June 201111 on human
rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises, and 21/5 of
27 September 201212 on the contribution of the United Nations system as a whole to
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3 See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
4 See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
5 Resolution 66/3.
6 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
7 Resolution 55/2.
8 Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
9 Resolution S-24/2, annex.
10 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and
corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53),
chap. III, sect. A.
12 Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.A/67/457/Add.2
71 12-63624
the advancement of the business and human rights agenda and the dissemination and
implementation of the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights,
Recognizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated and that the international community must treat human rights globally in
a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Realizing that globalization affects all countries differently and makes them
more exposed to external developments, positive as well as negative, inter alia, in
the field of human rights,
Realizing also that globalization is not merely an economic process, but that it
also has social, political, environmental, cultural and legal dimensions, which have
an impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Emphasizing the need to fully implement the global partnership for
development and enhance the momentum generated by the 2005 World Summit in
order to operationalize and implement the commitments made in the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits, including the 2005 World
Summit, in the economic, social and related fields, and reaffirming in particular the
commitment contained in paragraphs 19 and 47 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome13 to promote fair globalization and the development of the productive
sectors in developing countries to enable them to participate more effectively in and
benefit from the process of globalization,
Realizing the need to undertake a thorough, independent and comprehensive
assessment of the social, environmental and cultural impact of globalization on
societies,
Recognizing in each culture a dignity and value that deserve recognition,
respect and preservation, convinced that, in their rich variety and diversity and in
the reciprocal influences that they exert on one another, all cultures form part of the
common heritage belonging to all humankind, and aware of the risk that
globalization poses more of a threat to cultural diversity if the developing world
remains poor and marginalized,
Recognizing also that multilateral mechanisms have a unique role to play in
meeting the challenges and opportunities presented by globalization,
Realizing the need to consider the opportunities and challenges linked to
globalization with a view to addressing such challenges and building on possible
opportunities in order to achieve the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Emphasizing the global character of the migratory phenomenon, the
importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation and the need to
protect the human rights of migrants, particularly at a time in which migration flows
have increased in the globalized economy,
Expressing grave concern at the negative impact of international financial
turmoil on social and economic development and on the full enjoyment of all human
rights, particularly in the light of the continuing global financial and economic crisis,
which has an adverse impact on the realization of the internationally agreed
development goals, particularly the Millennium Development Goals, and recognizing
__________________
13 See resolution 60/1.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 72
that developing countries are in a more vulnerable situation when facing such
impact and that regional economic cooperation and development strategies and
programmes can play a role in mitigating such impact,
Expressing deep concern at the negative impact of the continuing global food
and energy crises and climate change challenges on social and economic
development and on the full enjoyment of all human rights for all,
Recognizing that globalization should be guided by the fundamental principles
that underpin the corpus of human rights, such as equity, participation,
accountability, non-discrimination at both the national and the international levels,
respect for diversity, tolerance and international cooperation and solidarity,
Emphasizing that the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the full
realization and effective enjoyment of human rights and that its immediate
alleviation and eventual elimination must remain a high priority for the international
community,
Acknowledging that there is greater acceptance that the increasing debt burden
faced by the most indebted developing countries is unsustainable and constitutes
one of the principal obstacles to achieving sustainable development and poverty
eradication and that, for many developing countries, excessive debt servicing has
severely constrained their capacity to promote social development and to provide
basic services to realize economic, social and cultural rights,
Strongly reiterating the determination to ensure the timely and full realization
of the development goals and objectives agreed at the major United Nations
conferences and summits, including those agreed at the Millennium Summit,
described as the Millennium Development Goals, which have helped to galvanize
efforts towards poverty eradication,
Gravely concerned at the inadequacy of measures to narrow the widening gap
between the developed and the developing countries, and within countries, which
has contributed to, inter alia, deepening poverty and has adversely affected the full
enjoyment of all human rights, in particular in developing countries,
Emphasizing that transnational corporations and other business enterprises
have a responsibility to respect all human rights,
Emphasizing also that human beings strive for a world that is respectful of
human rights and cultural diversity and that, in this regard, they work to ensure that
all activities, including those affected by globalization, are consistent with those aims,
1. Recognizes that, while globalization, by its impact on, inter alia, the role
of the State, may affect human rights, the promotion and protection of all human
rights is first and foremost the responsibility of the State;
2. Emphasizes that development should be at the centre of the international
economic agenda and that coherence between national development strategies and
international obligations and commitments is imperative for an enabling
environment for development and an inclusive and equitable globalization;
3. Reaffirms that narrowing the gap between rich and poor, both within and
between countries, is an explicit goal at the national and international levels, as part
of the effort to create an enabling environment for the full enjoyment of all human
rights;A/67/457/Add.2
73 12-63624
4. Also reaffirms the commitment to create an environment at both the
national and the global levels that is conducive to development and to the eradication
of poverty by, inter alia, promoting good governance within each country and at the
international level, eliminating protectionism, enhancing transparency in the
financial, monetary and trading systems and committing to an open, equitable, rule-
based, predictable and non-discriminatory multilateral trading and financial system;
5. Recognizes the impacts that the global financial and economic crisis is
still having on the ability of countries, particularly developing countries, to mobilize
resources for development and to address the impact of this crisis, and in this
context calls upon all States and the international community to alleviate, in an
inclusive and development-oriented manner, any negative impacts of this crisis on
the realization and the effective enjoyment of all human rights;
6. Also recognizes that, while globalization offers great opportunities, the
fact that its benefits are very unevenly shared and its costs unevenly distributed
represents an aspect of the process that affects the full enjoyment of all human
rights, in particular in developing countries;
7. Welcomes the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of human
rights,14 which focuses on the liberalization of agricultural trade and its impact on
the realization of the right to development, including the right to food, and takes
note of the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
8. Reaffirms the international commitment to eliminating hunger and to
securing food for all, today and tomorrow, and reiterates that the relevant United
Nations organizations should be assured the resources needed to expand and
enhance their food assistance, and support social safety net programmes designed to
address hunger and malnutrition, when appropriate, through the use of local or
regional purchase;
9. Calls upon Member States, relevant agencies of the United Nations
system, intergovernmental organizations and civil society to promote inclusive,
equitable and environmentally sustainable economic growth for managing
globalization so that poverty is systematically reduced and the international
development targets are achieved;
10. Recognizes that the responsible operations of transnational corporations
and other business enterprises can contribute to the promotion, protection and
fulfilment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular economic,
social and cultural rights;
11. Also recognizes that only through broad and sustained efforts, including
policies and measures at the global level to create a shared future based upon our
common humanity in all its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and
equitable and have a human face, thus contributing to the full enjoyment of all
human rights;
12. Underlines the urgent need to establish an equitable, transparent and
democratic international system to strengthen and broaden the participation of
developing countries in international economic decision-making and norm-setting;
__________________
14 E/CN.4/2002/54.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 74
13. Affirms that globalization is a complex process of structural
transformation, with numerous interdisciplinary aspects, which has an impact on the
enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right
to development;
14. Also affirms that the international community should strive to respond to
the challenges and opportunities posed by globalization in a manner that promotes
and protects human rights while ensuring respect for the cultural diversity of all;
15. Underlines, therefore, the need to continue to analyse the consequences
of globalization for the full enjoyment of all human rights;
16. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,15
and requests him to
continue to seek further the views of Member States and relevant agencies of the
United Nations system and to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth
session a substantive report on the subject based on those views, including
recommendations on ways to address the impact of globalization on the full
enjoyment of all human rights.
__________________
15 A/67/163.A/67/457/Add.2
75 12-63624
Draft resolution V
Human rights in the administration of justice
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the principles embodied in articles 3, 5, 8, 9 and 10 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 and the relevant provisions of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols
thereto,2 in particular articles 6, 7, 9 and 10 of the Covenant, the Convention on the
Rights of the Child,3 in particular articles 37, 39 and 40, and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,4 as well as all other relevant
international treaties,
Calling attention to the numerous international standards in the field of the
administration of justice,
Recalling all the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council
that are relevant to the subject of human rights in the administration of justice,
including General Assembly resolutions 62/158 of 18 December 2007 and 65/213 of
21 December 2010, and Human Rights Council resolutions 10/2 of 25 March 20095
and 18/12 of 29 September 2011,6
Recalling also General Assembly resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012
entitled “Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels”,
Welcoming the entry into force of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,7 and encouraging all States
that have not done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention,
Welcoming also the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women
Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules),8
Welcoming further the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to
Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems,9
Taking note of general comments No. 21, on the humane treatment of persons
deprived of their liberty, and No. 32, on the right to equality before courts and
tribunals and to a fair trial, adopted by the Human Rights Committee, and general
comments No. 10, on children’s rights in juvenile justice, and No. 13, on the right of
the child to freedom from all forms of violence, adopted by the Committee on the
Rights of the Child,
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex, and resolution 44/128, annex.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
4 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/64/53), chap. II, sect. A.
6 Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/66/53/Add.1), chap. II.
7 Resolution 61/177, annex.
8 Resolution 65/229, annex.
9 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2012, Supplement No. 10 (E/2012/30),
chap. I, sect. A.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 76
Noting with appreciation the important work in the field of the administration
of justice of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the Secretariat and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) as well as the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
Noting with satisfaction the work of the Interagency Panel on Juvenile Justice
and of its members, in particular their coordination in providing technical advice
and assistance in juvenile justice, and the active participation of civil society in their
respective work,
Convinced that the independence and impartiality of the judiciary and the
integrity of the judicial system as well as an independent legal profession are
essential prerequisites for the protection of human rights, the rule of law, good
governance and democracy, and for ensuring that there is no discrimination in the
administration of justice, and should therefore be respected in all circumstances,
Recalling that every State should provide an effective framework of remedies
to redress human rights grievances or violations,
Emphasizing that the right to access to justice for all forms an important basis
for strengthening the rule of law through the administration of justice,
Mindful of the importance of ensuring respect for the rule of law and human
rights in the administration of justice as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity,
Recognizing the importance of the principle that persons deprived of their
liberty shall retain their non-derogable human rights and all other human rights and
fundamental freedoms, except for those lawful limitations that are demonstrably
necessitated by the fact of incarceration,
Recalling that the social rehabilitation of persons deprived of their liberty shall
be among the essential aims of the criminal justice system, ensuring, as far as
possible, that offenders are able to lead a law-abiding and self-supporting life upon
their return to society,
Aware of the need for special vigilance with regard to the specific situation of
children, juveniles and women in the administration of justice, in particular while
they are deprived of their liberty, and their vulnerability to various forms of violence,
abuse, injustice and humiliation,
Recognizing the specific situation and needs of children formerly associated
with armed forces or armed groups when accused of crimes under international law
allegedly committed while associated with armed forces or armed groups,
Reaffirming that the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration
in all decisions concerning the child in the administration of justice, including in
relation to pretrial measures, as well as being an important consideration in all
matters concerning the child related to sentencing of his or her parents, or, where
applicable, legal guardians or primary caregivers,A/67/457/Add.2
77 12-63624
1. Takes note with appreciation of the most recent report of the Secretary-
General;10
2. Also takes note with appreciation of the most recent report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the protection of human rights of
juveniles deprived of their liberty11 and the joint report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children, on prevention of and responses to violence against children within
the juvenile justice system,12 both submitted to the Human Rights Council;
3. Reaffirms the importance of the full and effective implementation of all
United Nations standards on human rights in the administration of justice;
4. Reiterates its call to all Member States to spare no effort in providing for
effective legislative and other mechanisms and procedures, as well as adequate
resources, to ensure the full implementation of those standards;
5. Invites States to make use of technical assistance offered by the relevant
United Nations entities and programmes in order to strengthen national capacities
and infrastructures in the field of the administration of justice;
6. Appeals to Governments to include in their national development plans
the administration of justice as an integral part of the development process and to
allocate adequate resources for the provision of legal aid services with a view to
promoting and protecting human rights, and invites the international community to
respond favourably to requests for financial and technical assistance for the
enhancement and strengthening of the administration of justice;
7. Stresses the special need for national capacity-building in the field of the
administration of justice, in particular through reform of the judiciary, the police and
the penal system, as well as juvenile justice reform, in order to establish and
maintain stable societies and the rule of law in post-conflict situations, and in this
context welcomes the role of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in supporting the establishment and functioning of transitional
justice mechanisms in post-conflict situations;
8. Affirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
terrorism, including in the administration of justice, complies with their obligations
under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law;
9. Notes the work of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group to
exchange information on best practices, as well as on national legislation and
existing international law, and on the revision of existing United Nations standard
minimum rules for the treatment of prisoners so that they reflect recent advances in
correctional science and best practices, with a view to reporting on its progress to
the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-second
session, and in this regard invites the expert group to benefit from the expertise of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other relevant stakeholders;
__________________
10 A/67/260.
11 A/HRC/21/26.
12 A/HRC/21/25.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 78
10. Recalls the absolute prohibition of torture in international law, and calls
upon States to address and prevent the detention conditions, treatment and
punishment of persons deprived of their liberty that amount to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
11. Urges States to endeavour to reduce, where appropriate, pretrial
detention, inter alia, by adopting legislative and administrative measures and
policies on its preconditions, limitations, duration and alternatives and by taking
measures aimed at the implementation of existing legislation, as well as by ensuring
access to justice and legal advice and assistance;
12. Encourages States to address overcrowding in detention facilities by
taking effective measures, including through enhancing the use of alternatives to
pretrial detention and custodial sentences where possible, access to legal aid and the
efficiency as well as the capacity of the criminal justice system and its facilities;
13. Continues to encourage States to pay due attention to the United Nations
Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for
Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules)8
when developing and implementing
relevant legislation, procedures, policies and action plans, and invites relevant
special procedure mandate holders, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and all other relevant organizations to take those rules into consideration in their
activities;
14. Recognizes that every child and juvenile in conflict with the law must be
treated in a manner consistent with his or her rights, dignity and needs, in
accordance with international law, bearing in mind relevant international standards
on human rights in the administration of justice, and calls upon States parties to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child to abide strictly by its principles and
provisions;
15. Encourages States that have not yet integrated children’s issues into their
overall rule of law efforts to do so, and to develop and implement a comprehensive
juvenile justice policy to prevent and address juvenile delinquency, as well as with a
view to promoting, inter alia, the use of alternative measures, such as diversion and
restorative justice, and complying with the principle that deprivation of liberty of
children should be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest
appropriate period of time, as well as to avoid, wherever possible, the use of pretrial
detention for children;
16. Stresses the importance of including reintegration strategies for former
child offenders in juvenile justice policies, in particular through education
programmes, with a view to their assuming a constructive role in society;
17. Urges States to take all necessary and effective measures, including legal
reform where appropriate, to prevent and respond to all forms of violence against
children within the justice system;
18. Also urges States to ensure that, under their legislation and practice,
neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without the possibility of release,
nor corporal punishment is imposed for offences committed by persons under
18 years of age, and invites States to consider repealing all other forms of life
imprisonment for offences committed by persons under 18 years of age;A/67/457/Add.2
79 12-63624
19. Encourages States not to set the minimum age of criminal responsibility
at too low an age level, bearing in mind the emotional, mental and intellectual
maturity of the child, and in this respect refers to the recommendation of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child to increase the lower minimum age of
criminal responsibility without exception to the age of 12 years as the absolute
minimum age, and to continue to increase it to a higher age level;
20. Also encourages States to collect relevant information concerning
children within their criminal justice systems so as to improve their administration
of justice, while being mindful of the children’s right to privacy, with full respect
for relevant international human rights instruments, and bearing in mind applicable
international standards on human rights in the administration of justice;
21. Stresses the importance of paying greater attention to the impact of the
imprisonment of parents on their children, while noting with interest the day of
general discussion on the theme “The situation of children of prisoners”, held by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child on 30 September 2011, as well as the
summary report on the full-day meeting of the Human Rights Council on the rights
of the child;13
22. Invites Governments to provide for tailored and interdisciplinary human
rights training, including anti-racist, multicultural, gender-sensitive and child rights
training to all judges, lawyers, prosecutors, social workers, immigration and police
officers and other professionals concerned, including personnel deployed in
international field presences;
23. Encourages the regional commissions, the specialized agencies, United
Nations institutes active in the areas of human rights and crime prevention and
criminal justice, and other relevant parts of the United Nations system, as well as
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, including national
professional associations concerned with promoting United Nations standards in this
field, and other segments of civil society, including the media, to continue to
develop their activities in promoting human rights in the administration of justice;
24. Invites States, upon their request, to benefit from technical advice and
assistance in juvenile justice provided by the relevant United Nations entities and
programmes, in particular the Interagency Panel on Juvenile Justice, in order to
strengthen national capacities and infrastructures in the field of the administration of
justice, in particular juvenile justice;
25. Invites the Human Rights Council and the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, as well as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Violence against Children and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, to continue to closely coordinate their activities relating to the
administration of justice;
26. Invites the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to reinforce, within their
respective mandates, their activities relating to national capacity-building in the
field of the administration of justice, in particular in post-conflict situations, and in
this context to cooperate with relevant departments of the Secretariat, including the
__________________
13 A/HRC/21/31.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 80
Peacebuilding Support Office, the Department of Political Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
27. Underlines the importance of rebuilding and strengthening structures for
the administration of justice and of respecting the rule of law and human rights,
including in post-conflict situations, as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity, and in this respect requests the Secretary-General to
ensure system-wide coordination and coherence of programmes and activities of the
relevant parts of the United Nations system, including through the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General and
supported by the Rule of Law Unit of the Secretariat, and in cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission, including assistance provided through United Nations
field presences;
28. Invites States, in the context of the universal periodic review mechanism
and in their reports under international human rights treaties, to consider addressing
the promotion and protection of human rights in the administration of justice;
29. Invites relevant special procedure mandate holders of the Human Rights
Council as well as relevant treaty bodies to give special attention to questions
relating to the effective protection of human rights in the administration of justice,
including juvenile justice, and to provide, wherever appropriate, specific
recommendations in this regard, including proposals for advisory services and
technical assistance measures;
30. Invites the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to
consider developing a set of model strategies and practical measures on the
elimination of violence against children in the field of crime prevention and
criminal justice in consultation with all Member States and in close collaboration
with all relevant United Nations entities, in particular with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session and to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-fourth session a
report on the latest developments, challenges and good practices in human rights in
the administration of justice, analysing the international legal and institutional
framework for the protection of all persons deprived of their liberty, as well as the
activities undertaken by the United Nations system as a whole;
32. Decides to continue its consideration of the question of human rights in
the administration of justice at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.A/67/457/Add.2
81 12-63624
Draft resolution VI
Committee on the Rights of the Child
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Convention on the Rights of the Child1 and the Optional
Protocols thereto,2
Noting the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child3 and the report of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child,4
Noting the request of the Committee contained in annex III of its report,
Recalling its resolutions 66/254 of 23 February 2012 and 66/295 of
17 September 2012 on the intergovernmental process on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system, and
recognizing in this regard that a long-term solution to the problem of the increasing
backlog of reports of States parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
the Optional Protocols awaiting review by the Committee can be found in this
context,
1. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made so far by the Committee
on the Rights of the Child to improve the efficiency of its working methods, and
encourages the Committee to build upon its activities in this regard;
2. Notes that a backlog of more than one hundred reports exists related to
the submission by States parties of their reports under the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and the Optional Protocols in conformity with their obligations, and
notes with concern that if this backlog is not addressed, it will impede the ability of
the Committee on the Rights of the Child to consider reports in a timely manner;
3. Decides to authorize the Committee, recognizing that such a temporary
measure is not a long-term solution to the backlog and without prejudice to the
intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing
the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system, to meet in parallel
chambers, of nine members each, for the five working days of one of its three
pre-sessional working group meetings in 2014 and thirteen working days of one of
its three regular sessions in 2015, for the purposes of considering the reports of the
States parties submitted under article 44 of the Convention, article 8 of the Optional
Protocol thereto on the involvement of children in armed conflict5 and article 12 of
the Optional Protocol thereto on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography,6 taking due account of equitable geographical distribution and the
principal legal systems;
4. Invites States parties to adhere to the page limit established by the
Committee for reports of States parties, and notes that this would reduce the
operating costs of the Committee.
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
2 Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531 and resolution 66/138.
3 A/67/225.
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/67/41).
5 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2173, No. 27531.
6 Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 82
Draft resolution VII
Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 which guarantees the
right to life, liberty and security of person, the relevant provisions of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and other relevant human
rights conventions,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, as set out in Council
resolution 17/5 of 16 June 2011,3
Welcoming the universal ratification of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, 4 which alongside human rights law provide an important framework of
accountability in relation to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions during
armed conflict,
Mindful of all its resolutions on the subject of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions and the resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights and of
the Human Rights Council on the subject,
Noting with deep concern that impunity continues to be a major cause of the
perpetuation of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions,
Acknowledging that international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are complementary and mutually reinforcing,
Noting with deep concern the growing number of civilians and persons hors de
combat killed in situations of armed conflict and internal strife,
Noting also with deep concern the continuing instances of the arbitrary
deprivation of life, as a result of the imposition and implementation of capital
punishment in a manner that violates international law,
Deeply concerned about acts that can amount to extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions committed against persons exercising their rights of peaceful
assembly and freedom of expression in all regions of the world,
Acknowledging that extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions may under
certain circumstances amount to genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes,
as defined in international law, including in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court,5 and recalling in this regard that each individual State has the
responsibility to protect its populations from such crimes as set out in General
Assembly resolutions 60/1 of 16 September 2005 and 63/308 of 14 September 2009,
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53),
chap. III, sect. A.
4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
5 Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.A/67/457/Add.2
83 12-63624
Convinced of the need for effective action to prevent, combat and eliminate the
abhorrent practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, which
represent flagrant violations of international human rights law, particularly the right
to life, as well as violations of international humanitarian law,
1. Strongly condemns once again all the extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions that continue to occur throughout the world;
2. Demands that all States ensure that the practice of extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions is brought to an end and that they take effective action to
prevent, combat and eliminate the phenomenon in all its forms and manifestations;
3. Reiterates the obligation of all States under international law to conduct
thorough, prompt and impartial investigations into all suspected cases of
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, to identify and bring to justice those
responsible, while ensuring the right of every person to a fair hearing by a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal established by law, to grant adequate
compensation within a reasonable time to the victims or their families and to adopt
all necessary measures, including legal and judicial measures, to put an end to
impunity and to prevent the further occurrence of such executions, as recommended
in the Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extralegal,
Arbitrary and Summary Executions;6
4. Calls upon Governments, and invites intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, to pay greater attention to the work of national-
level commissions of inquiry into extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
with a view to ensuring the effective contribution of these commissions to
accountability and to combating impunity;
5. Calls upon all States, in order to prevent extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, to comply with their obligations under relevant provisions of
international human rights instruments, and further calls upon States which retain
the death penalty to pay particular regard to the provisions contained in articles 6,
14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2
and
articles 37 and 40 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,7 bearing in mind
the safeguards and guarantees set out in Economic and Social Council resolutions
1984/50 of 25 May 1984 and 1989/64 of 24 May 1989 and taking into account the
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur in the reports to the Human Rights
Council and the General Assembly, including his report submitted to the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session,8 regarding the need to respect all safeguards
and restrictions, including the most serious crimes limitation, stringent respect of
due process and fair trial safeguards and the right to seek pardon or commutation of
sentence;
6. Urges all States:
(a) To take all measures required by international human rights law and
international humanitarian law to prevent loss of life, in particular that of children,
during detention, arrest, public demonstrations, internal and communal violence,
civil unrest, public emergencies or armed conflicts and to ensure that the police, law
__________________
6 Economic and Social Council resolution 1989/65, annex.
7 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8 A/67/275.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 84
enforcement agents, armed forces and other agents acting on behalf of or with the
consent or acquiescence of the State act with restraint and in conformity with
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, including the
principles of proportionality and necessity, and in this regard to ensure that police
and law enforcement officials are guided by the Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials9 and the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms
by Law Enforcement Officials;10
(b) To ensure the effective protection of the right to life of all persons under
their jurisdiction, to investigate promptly and thoroughly all killings, including
those targeted at specific groups of persons, such as racially motivated violence
leading to the death of the victim, killings of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities or because of their sexual orientation or gender
identity, killings of persons affected by terrorism or hostage-taking or living under
foreign occupation, killings of refugees, internally displaced persons, migrants,
street children or members of indigenous communities, killings of persons for
reasons related to their activities as human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists or
demonstrators, killings committed in the name of passion or in the name of honour,
and all killings committed for discriminatory reasons on any basis, to bring those
responsible to justice before a competent, independent and impartial judiciary at the
national or, where appropriate, international level and to ensure that such killings,
including those committed by security forces, police and law enforcement agents,
paramilitary groups or private forces, are neither condoned nor sanctioned by State
officials or personnel;
7. Affirms the obligation of States, in order to prevent extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions, to protect the lives of all persons deprived of their
liberty in all circumstances and to investigate and respond to deaths in custody;
8. Urges all States to ensure that persons deprived of their liberty are
treated humanely and with full respect for international humanitarian and human
rights law and that their treatment, including judicial guarantees, and conditions
conform to the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners11 and,
where applicable, to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 19494
and the Additional
Protocols thereto, of 8 June 1977,12 in relation to all persons detained in armed
conflict, as well as to other pertinent international instruments;
9. Urges States to prevent and, where such situations exist, to end prisoner
control of prisons, bearing in mind the obligation of the State to protect human
rights, including protection against extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions;
10. Welcomes the International Criminal Court as an important contribution
to ending impunity concerning extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and,
noting the growing awareness of the Court worldwide, calls upon those States that
are under an obligation to cooperate with the Court to provide such cooperation and
assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the
__________________
9 Resolution 34/169, annex.
10 See Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Havana, 27 August-7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.
11 Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part), Universal
Instruments (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
12 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.A/67/457/Add.2
85 12-63624
provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses and the
enforcement of sentences, further welcomes the fact that one hundred and twenty-
one States have already ratified or acceded to and one hundred and thirty-nine States
have signed the Rome Statute of the Court,5
and calls upon all those States that have
not ratified or acceded to the Rome Statute and the Agreement on the Privileges and
Immunities of the International Criminal Court13 to give serious consideration to
doing so;
11. Acknowledges the importance of ensuring the protection of witnesses for
the prosecution of those suspected of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,
urges States to intensify efforts to establish and implement effective witness
protection programmes or other measures, and in this regard encourages the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to develop practical
tools designed to encourage and facilitate greater attention to the protection of
witnesses;
12. Encourages Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to organize training programmes and to support projects with a view
to training or educating military forces, law enforcement officers and government
officials in international humanitarian and human rights law connected with their
work and to include a gender and child rights perspective in such training, and
appeals to the international community and requests the Office of the High
Commissioner to support endeavours to that end;
13. Expresses its concern about the occurrence of vigilante killings around
the globe, encourages States, in order to support efforts to prevent and end such
killings, to undertake or facilitate systematic studies of the phenomenon with a view
to taking context-specific measures and focused action, and requests the Office of
the High Commissioner and other relevant United Nations entities, upon request, to
support such studies and their follow-up;
14. Takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur to the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council, and invites States to take due
consideration of the recommendations made therein;14
15. Commends the important role that the Special Rapporteur plays towards
the elimination of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and encourages
the Special Rapporteur to continue, within his mandate, to collect information from
all concerned, to respond effectively to reliable information that comes before him,
to follow up on communications and country visits and to seek the views and
comments of Governments and to reflect them, as appropriate, in his reports;
16. Acknowledges the important role of the Special Rapporteur in identifying
cases where extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions could amount to
genocide and crimes against humanity or war crimes, and urges the Special
Rapporteur to collaborate with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and, as appropriate, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide in addressing situations of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions that are of particularly serious concern or in which early action
might prevent further deterioration;
__________________
13 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2271, No. 40446.
14 See A/67/275 and A/66/330.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 86
17. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Special Rapporteur
and other United Nations mechanisms and procedures in the field of human rights,
and encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue efforts in that regard;
18. Urges all States, in particular those that have not done so, to cooperate
with the Special Rapporteur so that his mandate can be carried out effectively,
including by favourably and rapidly responding to requests for visits, mindful that
country visits are one of the essential tools for the fulfilment of the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur, and by responding in a timely manner to communications and
other requests transmitted to them by the Special Rapporteur;
19. Expresses its appreciation to those States that have received the Special
Rapporteur, asks them to examine his recommendations carefully, invites them to
inform him of the actions taken on those recommendations, and requests other
States to cooperate in a similar way;
20. Requests the Secretary-General once again to continue to use his best
endeavours in cases where the minimum standards of legal safeguards in articles 6,
9, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights appear not
to have been respected;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
adequate human, financial and material resources to enable him to carry out his
mandate effectively, including through country visits;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close collaboration
with the High Commissioner, in conformity with the mandate of the High
Commissioner established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of
20 December 1993, to ensure that personnel specialized in international humanitarian
and human rights law form part of United Nations missions, where appropriate, in
order to deal with serious violations of human rights, such as extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions;
23. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth and sixty-ninth sessions a report on the situation worldwide in regard to
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and his recommendations for more
effective action to combat this phenomenon;
24. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its sixty-ninth
session.A/67/457/Add.2
87 12-63624
Draft resolution VIII
Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to promoting international cooperation, as set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations, in particular Article 1, paragraph 3, as
well as relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 19931 for enhancing
genuine cooperation among Member States in the field of human rights,
Recalling its adoption of the United Nations Millennium Declaration on
8 September 20002 and its resolution 66/152 of 19 December 2011, Human Rights
Council resolution 19/33 of 23 March 20123 and the resolutions of the Commission
on Human Rights on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights,
Recalling also the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held at Durban, South Africa, from 31 August
to 8 September 2001, the Durban Review Conference, held at Geneva from 20 to
24 April 2009, and the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, 4 and their role in the enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights is essential for the full achievement of the purposes of the United
Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all human rights,
Recognizing also that the promotion and protection of human rights should be
based on the principle of cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at
strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their human rights
obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations in the
field of human rights could contribute greatly to the enhancement of international
cooperation in this field,
Emphasizing the need for further progress in the promotion and
encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter
alia, international cooperation,
Underlining the fact that mutual understanding, dialogue, cooperation,
transparency and confidence-building are important elements in all activities for the
promotion and protection of human rights,
__________________
1 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
2 Resolution 55/2.
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and
corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
4 See resolution 66/3.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 88
Recalling the adoption of resolution 2000/22 of 18 August 2000, on the
promotion of dialogue on human rights issues, by the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights at its fifty-second session,5
1. Reaffirms that it is one of the purposes of the United Nations and the
responsibility of all Member States to promote, protect and encourage respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia, international
cooperation;
2. Recognizes that, in addition to their separate responsibilities to their
individual societies, States have a collective responsibility to uphold the principles
of human dignity, equality and equity at the global level;
3. Reaffirms that dialogue among cultures and civilizations facilitates the
promotion of a culture of tolerance and respect for diversity, and welcomes in this
regard the holding of conferences and meetings at the national, regional and
international levels on dialogue among civilizations;
4. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order
based on inclusion, justice, equality and equity, human dignity, mutual
understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and universal
human rights, and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
5. Reaffirms the importance of the enhancement of international
cooperation for the promotion and protection of human rights and for the
achievement of the objectives of the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance;
6. Considers that international cooperation in the field of human rights, in
conformity with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, should make an effective and practical contribution to
the urgent task of preventing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
7. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms should be guided by the principles of universality,
non-selectivity, objectivity and transparency, in a manner consistent with the
purposes and principles set out in the Charter;
8. Emphasizes the role of international cooperation in support of national
efforts and in increasing the capacities of Member States in the field of human rights
through, inter alia, the enhancement of their cooperation with human rights
mechanisms, including through the provision of technical assistance, upon the
request of and in accordance with the priorities set by the States concerned;
9. Calls upon Member States, the specialized agencies and
intergovernmental organizations to continue to carry out a constructive dialogue and
consultations for the enhancement of understanding and the promotion and
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and encourages
non-governmental organizations to contribute actively to this endeavour;
10. Urges States to take necessary measures to enhance bilateral, regional
and international cooperation aimed at addressing the adverse impact of consecutive
__________________
5 See E/CN.4/2001/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/46, chap. II, sect. A.A/67/457/Add.2
89 12-63624
and compounded global crises, such as financial and economic crises, food crises,
climate change and natural disasters, on the full enjoyment of human rights;
11. Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and
procedures to continue to pay attention to the importance of mutual cooperation,
understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and protection of all human
rights;
12. Recalls the initiative of the Human Rights Council to organize a seminar
on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights, with
the participation of States, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
and other stakeholders, including academic experts and civil society, as decided in
Council resolution 19/33;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, to consult States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations on ways and means, as well as obstacles and
challenges and possible proposals to overcome them, for the enhancement of
international cooperation and dialogue in the United Nations human rights
machinery, including the Human Rights Council;
14. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its sixty-eighth
session.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 90
Draft resolution IX
Human rights and unilateral coercive measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on this subject, the most recent of which
was resolution 66/156 of 19 December 2011, and Human Rights Council decision
18/120 of 30 September 20111 and resolution 19/32 of 23 March 2012,2 as well as
previous resolutions of the Council and the Commission on Human Rights,
Reaffirming the pertinent principles and provisions contained in the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States proclaimed by the General Assembly in its
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, in particular article 32 thereof, in
which it declared that no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political
or any other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the
subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 66/156,3 and recalling the reports of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of Assembly resolutions 52/120 of 12 December
19974 and 55/110 of 4 December 2000,5
Stressing that unilateral coercive measures and legislation are contrary to
international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations among States,
Recognizing the universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated
character of all human rights, and in this regard reaffirming the right to development
as an integral part of all human rights,
Recalling the Final Document of the Sixteenth Ministerial Conference and
Commemorative Meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Bali,
Indonesia, from 23 to 27 May 2011, 6 the Final Document of the Sixteenth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012,7 and those adopted at previous summits and
conferences, in which States members of the Movement agreed to oppose and
condemn those measures or laws and their continued application, persevere with
efforts to effectively reverse them and urge other States to do likewise, as called for
by the General Assembly and other United Nations organs, and request States
applying those measures or laws to revoke them fully and immediately,
Recalling also that, at the World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna
from 14 to 25 June 1993, States were called upon to refrain from any unilateral
measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter that creates
__________________
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/65/53/Add.1), chap. II.
2 Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/67/53), chap. III.
3 A/67/181.
4 A/53/293 and Add.1.
5 A/56/207 and Add.1.
6 A/65/896-S/2011/407, annex I.
7 A/67/506-S/2012/752, annex I.A/67/457/Add.2
91 12-63624
obstacles to trade relations among States and impedes the full realization of all
human rights8 and also severely threatens the freedom of trade,
Bearing in mind all the references to this question in the Copenhagen
Declaration on Social Development adopted by the World Summit for Social
Development on 12 March 1995,9 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women on 15 September 1995,10 the
Istanbul Declaration on Human Settlements and the Habitat Agenda adopted by the
second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) on 14 June
1996,11 and their five-year reviews,
Expressing concern about the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures
on international relations, trade, investment and cooperation,
Expressing grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children is
adversely affected by unilateral coercive measures not in accordance with
international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade relations among
States, impede the full realization of social and economic development and hinder
the well-being of the population in the affected countries, with particular
consequences for women, children, including adolescents, the elderly and persons
with disabilities,
Deeply concerned that, despite the recommendations adopted on this question
by the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the Commission on Human
Rights and recent major United Nations conferences, and contrary to general
international law and the Charter, unilateral coercive measures continue to be
promulgated and implemented, with all their negative implications for the social
humanitarian activities and economic and social development of developing
countries, including their extraterritorial effects, thereby creating additional
obstacles to the full enjoyment of all human rights by peoples and individuals under
the jurisdiction of other States,
Bearing in mind all the extraterritorial effects of any unilateral legislative,
administrative and economic measures, policies and practices of a coercive nature
against the development process and the enhancement of human rights in developing
countries, which create obstacles to the full realization of all human rights,
Reaffirming that unilateral coercive measures are a major obstacle to the
implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,12
Recalling article 1, paragraph 2, common to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights13 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,13
which provides, inter alia, that in no case may a people be
deprived of its own means of subsistence,
__________________
8 See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
9 Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
10 Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
11 Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3-14 June
1996 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
12 Resolution 41/128, annex.
13 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 92
Noting the continuing efforts of the open-ended Working Group on the Right
to Development of the Human Rights Council, and reaffirming in particular its
criteria, according to which unilateral coercive measures are one of the obstacles to
the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,
1. Urges all States to cease adopting or implementing any unilateral
measures not in accordance with international law, international humanitarian law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles governing peaceful
relations among States, in particular those of a coercive nature, with all their
extraterritorial effects, which create obstacles to trade relations among States, thus
impeding the full realization of the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights14 and other international human rights instruments, in particular the
right of individuals and peoples to development;
2. Strongly urges States to refrain from promulgating and applying any
unilateral economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international
law and the Charter that impede the full achievement of economic and social
development, particularly in developing countries;
3. Also urges all States not to adopt any unilateral measures not in
accordance with international law and the Charter that impede the full achievement
of economic and social development by the population of the affected countries, in
particular children and women, that hinder their well-being and that create obstacles
to the full enjoyment of their human rights, including the right of everyone to a
standard of living adequate for his or her health and well-being and his or her right
to food, medical care and education and the necessary social services, as well as to
ensure that food and medicine are not used as tools for political pressure;
4. Strongly objects to the extraterritorial nature of those measures which, in
addition, threaten the sovereignty of States, and in this context calls upon all
Member States neither to recognize those measures nor to apply them, as well as to
take administrative or legislative measures, as appropriate, to counteract the
extraterritorial applications or effects of unilateral coercive measures;
5. Condemns the continuing unilateral application and enforcement by
certain Powers of unilateral coercive measures, and rejects those measures, with all
their extraterritorial effects, as being tools for political or economic pressure against
any country, in particular against developing countries, adopted with a view to
preventing those countries from exercising their right to decide, of their own free
will, their own political, economic and social systems, and because of the negative
effects of those measures on the realization of all the human rights of vast sectors of
their populations, in particular children, women, the elderly and persons with
disabilities;
6. Reaffirms that essential goods such as food and medicines should not be
used as tools for political coercion and that under no circumstances should people
be deprived of their own means of subsistence and development;
7. Calls upon Member States that have initiated such measures to abide by
the principles of international law, the Charter, the declarations of the United
Nations and world conferences and relevant resolutions and to commit themselves
to their obligations and responsibilities arising from the international human rights
__________________
14 Resolution 217 A (III).A/67/457/Add.2
93 12-63624
instruments to which they are parties by revoking such measures at the earliest
possible time;
8. Reaffirms, in this context, the right of all peoples to self-determination,
by virtue of which they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development;
9. Recalls that, according to the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, and the relevant principles and
provisions contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
proclaimed by the Assembly in its resolution 3281 (XXIX), in particular article 32
thereof, no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other
type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination
of the exercise of its sovereign rights and to secure from it advantages of any kind;
10. Rejects all attempts to introduce unilateral coercive measures, and urges
the Human Rights Council to take fully into account the negative impact of those
measures, including through the enactment of national laws and their extraterritorial
application which are not in conformity with international law, in its task concerning
the implementation of the right to development;
11. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
discharging her functions relating to the promotion, realization and protection of the
right to development and bearing in mind the continuing impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the population of developing countries, to give priority to the
present resolution in her annual report to the General Assembly;
12. Underlines the fact that unilateral coercive measures are one of the major
obstacles to the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,12
and in this regard calls upon all States to avoid the unilateral imposition of
economic coercive measures and the extraterritorial application of domestic laws
that run counter to the principles of free trade and hamper the development of
developing countries, as recognized by the Working Group on the Right to
Development of the Human Rights Council;
13. Recognizes that, in the Declaration of Principles adopted at the first
phase of the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Geneva from 10 to
12 December 2003,15 States were strongly urged to avoid and refrain from any
unilateral measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations in building the information society;
14. Reiterates its support for the invitation of the Human Rights Council to
all special rapporteurs and existing thematic mechanisms of the Council in the field
of economic, social and cultural rights to pay due attention, within the scope of their
respective mandates, to the negative impact and consequences of unilateral coercive
measures;
15. Reaffirms the request of the Human Rights Council that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights prepare a thematic study on
the impact of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights,
__________________
15 A/C.2/59/3, annex, chap. I, sect. A.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 94
including recommendations on actions aimed at ending such measures, taking into
account all previous reports, resolutions and relevant information available to the
United Nations system in this regard, to be submitted to the Council at its nineteenth
session;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of all Member States, to continue to collect their views and information on
the implications and negative effects of unilateral coercive measures on their
populations and to submit an analytical report thereon to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session, while reiterating once again the need to highlight the practical
and preventive measures in this respect;
17. Decides to examine the question on a priority basis at its sixty-eighth
session, under the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.A/67/457/Add.2
95 12-63624
Draft resolution X
The right to development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses, in particular,
the determination to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom and, to that end, to employ international mechanisms for the promotion of
the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 as well as the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,2
Recalling also the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic and social fields,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development, adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986, which confirmed
that the right to development is an inalienable human right and that equality of
opportunity for development is a prerogative both of nations and of individuals who
make up nations, and that the individual is the central subject and beneficiary of
development,
Stressing that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action3 reaffirmed
the right to development as a universal and inalienable right and an integral part of
fundamental human rights, and the individual as the central subject and beneficiary
of development,
Reaffirming the objective of making the right to development a reality for
everyone, as set out in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by the
General Assembly on 8 September 2000,4
Deeply concerned that the majority of indigenous peoples in the world live in
conditions of poverty, and recognizing the critical need to address the negative
impact of poverty and inequity on indigenous peoples by ensuring their full and
effective inclusion in development and poverty eradication programmes,
Reaffirming the universality, indivisibility, interrelatedness, interdependence
and mutually reinforcing nature of all civil, cultural, economic, political and social
rights, including the right to development,
Expressing deep concern over the lack of progress in the trade negotiations of
the World Trade Organization, and reaffirming the need for a successful outcome of
the Doha Development Round in key areas such as agriculture, market access for
non-agricultural products, trade facilitation, development and services,
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
4 Resolution 55/2.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 96
Recalling the outcome of the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, held in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008, on the theme
“Addressing the opportunities and challenges of globalization for development”,5
Recalling also all its previous resolutions, Human Rights Council resolution
21/32 of 28 September 2012,6 previous resolutions of the Council and those of the
Commission on Human Rights on the right to development, in particular
Commission resolution 1998/72 of 22 April 19987 on the urgent need to make
further progress towards the realization of the right to development as set out in the
Declaration on the Right to Development,
Recalling the outcome of the eleventh session of the Working Group on the
Right to Development of the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva from 26 to
30 April 2010, as contained in the report of the Working Group8 and as referred to
in the report of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the right to development,9
Recalling also the Sixteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012, and the previous
summits and conferences at which the States members of the Movement stressed the
need to operationalize the right to development as a priority,
Reiterating its continuing support for the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development10 as a development framework for Africa,
Expressing its appreciation for the efforts of the Chair-Rapporteur of the
Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human Rights Council and the
members of the high-level task force on the implementation of the right to
development in completing the 2008-2010 three-phase road map established by the
Council in its resolution 4/4 of 30 March 2007,11
Deeply concerned about the negative impacts of the global economic and
financial crises on the realization of the right to development,
Recognizing that, while development facilitates the enjoyment of all human
rights, the lack of development may not be invoked to justify the abridgement of
internationally recognized human rights,
Recognizing also that Member States should cooperate with each other in
ensuring development and eliminating obstacles to development, that the
international community should promote effective international cooperation for the
realization of the right to development and the elimination of obstacles to
development and that lasting progress towards the implementation of the right to
development requires effective development policies at the national level, as well as
__________________
5 See TD/442 and Corr.1 and 2.
6 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
7 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23),
chap. II, sect. A.
8 A/HRC/15/23.
9 A/HRC/15/24.
10 A/57/304, annex.
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/62/53), chap. III, sect. A.A/67/457/Add.2
97 12-63624
equitable economic relations and a favourable economic environment at the
international level,
Recognizing further that poverty is an affront to human dignity,
Recognizing that extreme poverty and hunger are one of the greatest global
threats and require the collective commitment of the international community for its
eradication, pursuant to Millennium Development Goal 1, and therefore calling
upon the international community, including the Human Rights Council, to
contribute towards achieving that goal,
Recognizing also that historical injustices have undeniably contributed to the
poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization, social exclusion, economic disparity,
instability and insecurity that affect many people in different parts of the world, in
particular in developing countries,
Stressing that poverty eradication is one of the critical elements in the
promotion and realization of the right to development and that poverty is a
multifaceted problem that requires a multifaceted and integrated approach in
addressing economic, political, social, environmental and institutional dimensions at
all levels, especially in the context of the Millennium Development Goal of halving,
by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income is less than one dollar a
day and the proportion of people who suffer from hunger,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the right to development,12
2. Recognizes the significance of all the events held to commemorate the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Right to Development, 13
including the panel discussion on the theme “The way forward in the realization of
the right to development: between policy and practice”, held during the eighteenth
session of the Human Rights Council;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations adopted by consensus by
the Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human Rights Council at its
eleventh session,8
and, while reaffirming them, calls for their immediate, full and
effective implementation by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and other relevant actors, noting also the efforts under way within
the framework of the Working Group with a view to completing the tasks entrusted
to it by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 4/4;
4. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Working Group, as
renewed by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 9/3 of 24 September 2008,14
with the recognition that the Working Group may convene annual sessions of five
working days and submit its reports to the Council;
5. Welcomes the launching, in the Working Group on the Right to
Development, of the process for considering, revising and refining the draft right-to-
__________________
12 A/HRC/19/45.
13 Resolution 41/128, annex.
14 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/63/53/Add.1), chap. I.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 98
development criteria and corresponding operational subcriteria, 15 with the first
reading of the draft criteria;
6. Emphasizes the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution
60/251 of 15 March 2006 establishing the Human Rights Council, and in this regard
calls upon the Council to implement the agreement to continue to act to ensure that
its agenda promotes and advances sustainable development and the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals, and also in this regard to lead to raising the
right to development, as set out in paragraphs 5 and 10 of the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action,3
to the same level as and on a par with all other human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
7. Notes the work of the high-level task force on the implementation of the
right to development, the mandate of which ended in 2010, including its
consolidation of findings and the list of right-to-development criteria and
corresponding operational subcriteria;16
8. Encourages Member States and relevant stakeholders, when submitting
views on the work of the high-level task force and the way forward, to take into
consideration the essential features of the right to development, using as a reference
the Declaration on the Right to Development and resolutions on the right to
development of the Commission on Human Rights, the Human Rights Council and
the General Assembly;
9. Stresses that the above-mentioned compilations of views, criteria and
corresponding operational subcriteria, once considered, revised and endorsed by the
Working Group, should be used, as appropriate, in the elaboration of a
comprehensive and coherent set of standards for the implementation of the right to
development;
10. Emphasizes the importance of the Working Group taking appropriate
steps to ensure respect for and practical application of the above-mentioned
standards, which could take various forms, including the elaboration of guidelines
on the implementation of the right to development, and evolve into a basis for
consideration of an international legal standard of a binding nature through a
collaborative process of engagement;
11. Stresses the importance of the core principles contained in the
conclusions of the Working Group at its third session,17 congruent with the purpose
of international human rights instruments, such as equality, non-discrimination,
accountability, participation and international cooperation, as critical to
mainstreaming the right to development at the national and international levels, and
underlines the importance of the principles of equity and transparency;
12. Also stresses that it is important that the Chair-Rapporteur and the
Working Group, in the discharge of their mandates, take into account the need:
(a) To promote the democratization of the system of international
governance in order to increase the effective participation of developing countries in
international decision-making;
__________________
15 See A/HRC/15/WG.2/TF/2/Add.2.
16 See A/HRC/15/WG.2/TF/2 and Corr.1 and Add.1/Corr.1 and Add.2.
17 See E/CN.4/2002/28/Rev.1, sect. VIII.A.A/67/457/Add.2
99 12-63624
(b) To also promote effective partnerships such as the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development10
and other similar initiatives with the developing countries,
particularly the least developed countries, for the purpose of the realization of their
right to development, including the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals;
(c) To strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization of the
right to development at the international level, while urging all States to undertake
at the national level the necessary policy formulation and to institute the measures
required for the implementation of the right to development as an integral part of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and also urging all States to expand and
deepen mutually beneficial cooperation in ensuring development and eliminating
obstacles to development in the context of promoting effective international
cooperation for the realization of the right to development, bearing in mind that
lasting progress towards the implementation of the right to development requires
effective development policies at the national level and a favourable economic
environment at the international level;
(d) To consider ways and means to continue to ensure the operationalization
of the right to development as a priority;
(e) To mainstream the right to development in the policies and operational
activities of the United Nations and the specialized agencies, funds and programmes,
as well as in the policies and strategies of the international financial and multilateral
trading systems, bearing in mind in this regard that the core principles of the
international economic, commercial and financial spheres, such as equity, non-
discrimination, transparency, accountability, participation and international
cooperation, including effective partnerships for development, are indispensable in
achieving the right to development and preventing discriminatory treatment arising
from political or other non-economic considerations in addressing the issues of
concern to the developing countries;
13. Encourages the Human Rights Council to continue considering how to
ensure follow up to the work of the former Subcommission on the Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights on the right to development, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Commission on Human Rights and in compliance with decisions to be taken by the
Council;
14. Invites Member States and all other stakeholders to participate actively in
future sessions of the Social Forum, while recognizing the strong support extended
to the Forum at its first four sessions by the Subcommission on the Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights;
15. Reaffirms the commitment to implement the goals and targets set out in
all the outcome documents of the major United Nations conferences and summits
and their review processes, in particular those relating to the realization of the right
to development, recognizing that the realization of the right to development is
critical to achieving the objectives, goals and targets set in those outcome
documents;
16. Also reaffirms that the realization of the right to development is essential
to the implementation of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, which
regards all human rights as universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 100
places the human person at the centre of development and recognizes that, while
development facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, the lack of development
may not be invoked to justify the abridgement of internationally recognized human
rights;
17. Stresses that the primary responsibility for the promotion and protection
of all human rights lies with the State, and reaffirms that States have the primary
responsibility for their own economic and social development and that the role of
national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized;
18. Reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to create national and
international conditions favourable to the realization of the right to development, as
well as their commitment to cooperate with each other to that end;
19. Also reaffirms the need for an international environment that is
conducive to the realization of the right to development;
20. Stresses the need to strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and
realization of the right to development at the international and national levels, and
calls upon all States to institute the measures required for the implementation of the
right to development as an integral part of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
21. Emphasizes the critical importance of identifying and analysing obstacles
impeding the full realization of the right to development at both the national and the
international levels;
22. Affirms that, while globalization offers both opportunities and challenges,
the process of globalization remains deficient in achieving the objectives of
integrating all countries into a globalized world, and stresses the need for policies
and measures at the national and global levels to respond to the challenges and
opportunities of globalization if this process is to be made fully inclusive and
equitable;
23. Recognizes that, despite continuous efforts on the part of the
international community, the gap between developed and developing countries
remains unacceptably wide, that most of the developing countries continue to face
difficulties in participating in the globalization process and that many risk being
marginalized and effectively excluded from its benefits;
24. Expresses its deep concern, in this regard, about the negative impact on
the realization of the right to development due to the further aggravation of the
economic and social situation, in particular of developing countries, as a result of
the ongoing international energy, food and financial crises, as well as the increasing
challenges posed by global climate change and the loss of biodiversity, which have
increased vulnerabilities and inequalities and have adversely affected development
gains, in particular in developing countries;
25. Underlines the fact that the international community is far from meeting
the target set in the United Nations Millennium Declaration4
of halving the number
of people living in poverty by 2015, reaffirms the commitment made to meet that
target, and emphasizes the principle of international cooperation, including
partnership and commitment, between developed and developing countries towards
achieving the goal;A/67/457/Add.2
101 12-63624
26. Urges developed countries that have not yet done so to make concrete
efforts towards meeting the targets of 0.7 per cent of their gross national product for
official development assistance to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.2 per cent of
their gross national product to least developed countries, and encourages developing
countries to build on the progress achieved in ensuring that official development
assistance is used effectively to help to meet development goals and targets;
27. Recognizes the need to address market access for developing countries,
including in the sectors of agriculture, services and non-agricultural products, in
particular those of interest to developing countries;
28. Calls once again for the implementation of a desirable pace of
meaningful trade liberalization, including in areas under negotiation in the World
Trade Organization; the implementation of commitments on implementation-related
issues and concerns; a review of special and differential treatment provisions, with a
view to strengthening them and making them more precise, effective and
operational; the avoidance of new forms of protectionism; and capacity-building and
technical assistance for developing countries as important issues in making progress
towards the effective implementation of the right to development;
29. Recognizes the important link between the international economic,
commercial and financial spheres and the realization of the right to development;
stresses in this regard the need for good governance and for broadening the base of
decision-making at the international level on issues of development concern and the
need to fill organizational gaps, as well as to strengthen the United Nations system
and other multilateral institutions; and also stresses the need to broaden and
strengthen the participation of developing countries and countries with economies in
transition in international economic decision-making and norm-setting;
30. Also recognizes that good governance and the rule of law at the national
level assist all States in the promotion and protection of human rights, including the
right to development, and agrees on the value of the ongoing efforts being made by
States to identify and strengthen good governance practices, including transparent,
responsible, accountable and participatory government, that are responsive and
appropriate to their needs and aspirations, including in the context of agreed
partnership approaches to development, capacity-building and technical assistance;
31. Further recognizes the important role and the rights of women and the
application of a gender perspective as a cross-cutting issue in the process of
realizing the right to development, and notes in particular the positive relationship
between the education of women and their equal participation in the civil, cultural,
economic, political and social activities of the community and the promotion of the
right to development;
32. Stresses the need for the integration of the rights of children, girls and
boys alike, in all policies and programmes and for ensuring the promotion and
protection of those rights, especially in areas relating to health, education and the
full development of their capacities;
33. Recalls the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our
Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS, adopted on 10 June 2011 at the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS, 18 stresses that further and
__________________
18 Resolution 65/277, annex.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 102
additional measures must be taken at the national and international levels to fight
HIV and AIDS and other communicable diseases, taking into account ongoing
efforts and programmes, and reiterates the need for international assistance in this
regard;
34. Welcomes the Political Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases,
adopted on 19 September 2011,19 with a particular focus on development and other
challenges and social and economic impacts, particularly for developing countries;
35. Recalls the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”;20
36. Recalls the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,21
which entered into force on 3 May 2008, and stresses the need to take into
consideration the rights of persons with disabilities and the importance of
international cooperation in support of national efforts in the realization of the right
to development;
37. Stresses its commitment to indigenous peoples in the process of the
realization of the right to development, and reaffirms the commitment to promote
their rights in the areas of education, employment, vocational training and retraining,
housing, sanitation, health and social security, in accordance with recognized
international human rights obligations and taking into account, as appropriate, the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 61/295 of 13 September 2007;
38. Recognizes the need for strong partnerships with civil society
organizations and the private sector in pursuit of poverty eradication and
development, as well as for corporate social responsibility;
39. Emphasizes the urgent need for taking concrete and effective measures to
prevent, combat and criminalize all forms of corruption at all levels, to prevent,
detect and deter in a more effective manner international transfers of illicitly
acquired assets and to strengthen international cooperation in asset recovery,
consistent with the principles of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption,22 particularly chapter V thereof, stresses the importance of a genuine
political commitment on the part of all Governments through a firm legal framework,
and in this context urges States to sign and ratify the Convention as soon as possible
and States parties to implement it effectively;
40. Also emphasizes the need to strengthen further the activities of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the promotion and
realization of the right to development, including by ensuring effective use of the
financial and human resources necessary to fulfil its mandate, and calls upon the
Secretary-General to provide the Office of the High Commissioner with the
necessary resources;
41. Reaffirms the request to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, in mainstreaming the right to development, to undertake effectively
__________________
19 Resolution 66/2, annex.
20 Resolution 66/288, annex.
21 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
22 Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.A/67/457/Add.2
103 12-63624
activities aimed at strengthening the global partnership for development among
Member States, development agencies and the international development, financial
and trade institutions and to reflect those activities in detail in her next report to the
Human Rights Council;
42. Calls upon the United Nations funds and programmes, as well as the
specialized agencies, to mainstream the right to development in their operational
programmes and objectives, and stresses the need for the international financial and
multilateral trading systems to mainstream the right to development in their policies
and objectives;
43. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of Member States, United Nations organs and bodies, specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, international development and financial institutions, in
particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and non-governmental organizations;
44. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session and an interim report to the Human Rights
Council on the implementation of the present resolution, including efforts
undertaken at the national, regional and international levels in the promotion and
realization of the right to development, and invites the Chair-Rapporteur of the
Working Group to present an oral report and to engage in an interactive dialogue
with the Assembly at its sixty-eighth session.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 104
Draft resolution XI
Protection of migrants
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the protection of migrants, the most
recent of which is resolution 66/172 of 19 December 2011, as well as its resolution
66/128 of 19 December 2011, on violence against women migrant workers, and
recalling also Human Rights Council resolution 20/3 of 5 July 2012,1
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,2 which proclaims that
all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any kind,
in particular as to race, colour or national origin,
Reaffirming also that everyone has the right to freedom of movement and
residence within the borders of each State and the right to leave any country,
including his or her own, and to return to his or her country,
Recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights3 and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,3
the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,4
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,5
the Convention on the Rights of the Child,6 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,7 the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities,8 the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations9 and the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families,10
Acknowledging the relevant contribution of the International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
to the international system for the protection of migrants,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,11 which calls upon States
to promote and protect effectively the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
migrants regardless of migration status, especially those of women and children, and
to address international migration through international, regional or bilateral
cooperation and dialogue and a comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing
the roles and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in
promoting and protecting the human rights of all migrants, and avoiding approaches
that might aggravate their vulnerability,
__________________
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and
corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
2 Resolution 217 A (III).
3 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
5 Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7 Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
8 Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
9 Ibid., vol. 596, No. 8638.
10 Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
11 Resolution 66/288, annex.A/67/457/Add.2
105 12-63624
Recalling also the provisions concerning migrants contained in the outcome
documents of all major United Nations conferences and summits, including the
Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development,12 which recognizes that migrant workers are among the
most affected and vulnerable in the context of financial and economic crises,
Recalling further Commission on Population and Development resolutions
2006/2 of 10 May 200613 and 2009/1 of 3 April 2009,14
Recalling that the Commission on Population and Development will consider
the issue of new trends in migration: demographic aspects at its forty-sixth session
in 2013,
Taking note of advisory opinion OC-16/99 of 1 October 1999 on the Right to
Information on Consular Assistance in the Framework of the Guarantees of the Due
Process of Law and advisory opinion OC-18/03 of 17 September 2003 on the
Juridical Condition and Rights of Undocumented Migrants, issued by the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights,
Taking note also of the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of
31 March 2004 in the case concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals15 and
the Judgment of the Court of 19 January 2009 regarding the request for
interpretation of the Avena Judgment, 16 and recalling the obligations of States
reaffirmed in both decisions,
Underlining the importance of the Human Rights Council in promoting respect
for the protection of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all, including
migrants,
Recognizing the increasing participation of women in international migration
movements,
Looking forward to the convening of the High-level Dialogue on International
Migration and Development in 2013, and recalling the previous High-level Dialogue
on the subject, held in New York on 14 and 15 September 2006, for the purpose of
discussing the multidimensional aspects of international migration and development,
at which, inter alia, the relationship between international migration, development
and human rights was recognized,
Noting that the sixth meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and
Development, held in Mauritius on 21 and 22 November 2012, drew together the
outcomes of several preparatory meetings, focusing on the overarching theme
“Enhancing the development of migrants and their contribution to the development
of their communities and States” as a contribution to promoting international
__________________
12 Resolution 63/303, annex.
13 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2006, Supplement No. 5 (E/2006/25),
chap. I, sect. B.
14 Ibid., 2009, Supplement No. 5 (E/2009/25), chap. I, sect. B.
15 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/59/4),
chap. V, sect. A.23; see also Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States of
America), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2004, p. 12.
16 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/64/4),
chap. V, sect. B.12; see also Request for Interpretation of the Judgment of 31 March 2004 in the
Case concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States of America)
(Mexico v. United States of America), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2009, p. 3.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 106
cooperation among States and between States and other actors in order to strengthen
the capacity of States to address migration and development opportunities and
challenges more effectively,
Recognizing the cultural and economic contributions made by migrants to
receiving societies and their communities of origin, as well as the need to identify
appropriate means of maximizing development benefits and responding to the
challenges that migration poses to countries of origin, transit and destination,
especially in the light of the impact of the financial and economic crisis, and
committing to ensuring dignified, humane treatment with applicable protections and
to strengthening mechanisms for international cooperation,
Emphasizing the global character of the migratory phenomenon, the
importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation and dialogue in this
regard, as appropriate, and the need to protect the human rights of migrants,
particularly at a time in which migration flows have increased in the globalized
economy and take place in a context of new security concerns,
Recognizing that women migrant workers are important contributors to social
and economic development in countries of origin and destination through the
economic and social impacts of their work, and underlining the value and dignity of
their labour, including the labour of domestic workers,
Bearing in mind the obligations of States under international law, as applicable,
to exercise due diligence to prevent crimes against migrants and to investigate and
punish perpetrators, and that not doing so violates and impairs or nullifies the
enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of victims,
Affirming that crimes against migrants, including trafficking in persons,
continue to pose a serious challenge and require a concerted international
assessment and response and genuine multilateral cooperation among countries of
origin, transit and destination for their eradication,
Bearing in mind that policies and initiatives on the issue of migration,
including those that refer to the orderly management of migration, should promote
holistic approaches that take into account the causes and consequences of the
phenomenon, as well as full respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of migrants,
Stressing the importance of regulations and laws regarding irregular migration,
at all levels of government, being in accordance with the obligations of States under
international law, including international human rights law,
Stressing also the obligation of States to protect the human rights of migrants
regardless of their migration status, and expressing its concern at measures which,
including in the context of policies aimed at reducing irregular migration, treat
irregular migration as a criminal rather than an administrative offence where the
effect of doing so is to deny migrants full enjoyment of their human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Aware that, as criminals take advantage of migratory flows and attempt to
circumvent restrictive immigration policies, migrants become more vulnerable to,
inter alia, kidnapping, extortion, forced labour, sexual exploitation, physical assault,
debt servitude and abandonment,A/67/457/Add.2
107 12-63624
Recognizing the contributions of young migrants to countries of origin and
destination, and in that regard encouraging States to consider the specific
circumstances and needs of young migrants,
Concerned about the large and growing number of migrants, especially women
and children, who place themselves in a vulnerable situation by attempting to cross
international borders without the required travel documents, and recognizing the
obligation of States to respect the human rights of those migrants,
Stressing that penalties and the treatment given to irregular migrants should be
commensurate with their infraction,
Recognizing the importance of having a comprehensive and balanced approach
to international migration, and bearing in mind that migration enriches the economic,
political, social and cultural fabric of States and the historical and cultural ties that
exist among some regions,
Recognizing also the obligations of countries of origin, transit and destination
under international human rights law,
Underlining the importance for States, in cooperation with non-governmental
organizations and other relevant stakeholders, to undertake information campaigns
aimed at clarifying opportunities, limitations, risks and rights in the event of
migration, in order to enable everyone to make informed decisions and to prevent
anyone from utilizing dangerous means to cross international borders,
1. Calls upon States to effectively promote and protect the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their migration status,
especially those of women and children, and to address international migration
through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and through a
comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of
countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting and protecting the human
rights of all migrants, and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their
vulnerability;
2. Expresses its concern about the impact of financial and economic crises
on international migration and migrants, and in that regard urges Governments to
combat unfair and discriminatory treatment of migrants, in particular migrant
workers and their families;
3. Reaffirms the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights2
and the obligations of States under the International Covenants on Human
Rights,3
and in this regard:
(a) Strongly condemns the acts, manifestations and expressions of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against migrants and the
stereotypes often applied to them, including on the basis of religion or belief, and
urges States to apply and, where needed, reinforce the existing laws when
xenophobic or intolerant acts, manifestations or expressions against migrants occur,
in order to eradicate impunity for those who commit those acts;
(b) Expresses concern about legislation adopted by some States that results
in measures and practices that may restrict the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of migrants, and reaffirms that, when exercising their sovereign right to
enact and implement migratory and border security measures, States have the dutyA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 108
to comply with their obligations under international law, including international
human rights law, in order to ensure full respect for the human rights of migrants;
(c) Calls upon States to ensure that their laws and policies, including in the
areas of counter-terrorism and combating transnational organized crime, such as
trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, fully respect the human rights of
migrants;
(d) Calls upon States that have not done so to consider signing and ratifying
or acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families10
as a matter of priority, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to promote and raise
awareness of the Convention;
(e) Takes note of the report of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families on its fifteenth and sixteenth
sessions;17
4. Also reaffirms the duty of States to effectively promote and protect the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrants, especially those of women
and children, regardless of their immigration status, in conformity with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international instruments to which
they are party, and therefore:
(a) Calls upon all States to respect the human rights and the inherent dignity
of migrants and to put an end to arbitrary arrest and detention and, where necessary,
to review detention periods in order to avoid excessive detention of irregular
migrants, and to adopt, where applicable, alternative measures to detention;
(b) Urges all States to adopt effective measures to prevent and punish any
form of illegal deprivation of liberty of migrants by individuals or groups;
(c) Notes with appreciation the measures adopted by some States to reduce
detention periods in cases of undocumented migration in the application of domestic
regulations and laws regarding irregular migration;
(d) Also notes with appreciation the successful implementation by some
States of alternative measures to detention in cases of undocumented migration as a
practice that deserves consideration by all States;
(e) Requests States to adopt concrete measures to prevent the violation of the
human rights of migrants while in transit, including in ports and airports and at
borders and migration checkpoints, to train public officials who work in those
facilities and in border areas to treat migrants respectfully and in accordance with
the law, and to prosecute, in conformity with applicable law, any act of violation of
the human rights of migrants, inter alia, arbitrary detention, torture and violations of
the right to life, including extrajudicial executions, during their transit from their
country of origin to the country of destination and vice versa, including their transit
through national borders;
(f) Underlines the right of migrants to return to their country of citizenship,
and recalls that States must ensure that their returning nationals are duly received;
__________________
17 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 48 and
corrigendum (A/67/48 and Corr.1).A/67/457/Add.2
109 12-63624
(g) Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to ensure full respect
for and observance of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations,9
in particular
with regard to the right of all foreign nationals, regardless of their immigration
status, to communicate with a consular official of the sending State in case of arrest,
imprisonment, custody or detention, and the obligation of the receiving State to
inform the foreign national without delay of his or her rights under the Convention;
(h) Requests all States, in conformity with national legislation and applicable
international legal instruments to which they are party, to enforce labour law
effectively, including by addressing violations of such law, with regard to migrant
workers’ labour relations and working conditions, inter alia, those related to their
remuneration and conditions of health, safety at work and the right to freedom of
association;
(i) Encourages all States to remove unlawful obstacles, where they exist,
that may prevent the safe, transparent, unrestricted and expeditious transfer of
remittances, earnings, assets and pensions of migrants to their country of origin or
to any other countries, in conformity with applicable legislation and agreements,
and to consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other problems that may impede
such transfers;
(j) Recalls that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes that
everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for
acts violating the fundamental rights granted to him or her;
5. Emphasizes the importance of protecting persons in vulnerable situations,
and in this regard:
(a) Expresses its concern about the increase in the activities of transnational
and national organized crime entities and others who profit from crimes against
migrants, especially women and children, without regard for dangerous and
inhumane conditions and in flagrant violation of domestic laws and international
law and contrary to international standards;
(b) Also expresses its concern about the high level of impunity enjoyed by
traffickers and their accomplices as well as other members of organized crime
entities and, in this context, the denial of rights and justice to migrants who have
suffered from abuse;
(c) Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries, that
allow migrants to integrate fully into the host countries, facilitate family
reunification and promote a harmonious, tolerant and respectful environment, and
encourages States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of programmes;
(d) Calls upon States that have not already done so to provide for the
protection of the human rights of women migrant workers, to promote fair labour
conditions and to ensure that all women, including care workers, are legally
protected against violence and exploitation;
(e) Encourages States to implement gender-sensitive policies and
programmes for women migrant workers, to provide safe and legal channels that
recognize the skills and education of women migrant workers and to facilitate their
productive employment, decent work and integration into the labour force, including
in the fields of education and science and technology;A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 110
(f) Encourages all States to develop international migration policies and
programmes that include a gender perspective, in order to adopt the measures
necessary to better protect women and girls against dangers and abuse during
migration;
(g) Calls upon States to protect the human rights of migrant children, given
their vulnerability, particularly unaccompanied migrant children, ensuring that the
best interests of the child are a primary consideration in their policies of integration,
return and family reunification;
(h) Encourages all States to prevent and eliminate discriminatory policies
and legislation, at all levels of government, that deny migrant children access to
education;
(i) Encourages States, while taking into account the best interests of the
child as a primary consideration, to foster the successful integration of migrant
children into the education system and the removal of barriers to their education in
host countries and countries of origin;
(j) Urges States to ensure that repatriation mechanisms allow for the
identification and special protection of persons in vulnerable situations, including
persons with disabilities, and take into account, in conformity with their
international obligations and commitments, the principle of the best interests of the
child and family reunification;
(k) Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime18 and supplementing protocols thereto, namely, the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air19 and the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children,20 to implement them fully, and calls upon States that have not done so to
consider ratifying or acceding to them as a matter of priority;
6. Takes note with appreciation of the study of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on challenges and best practices in
the implementation of the international framework for the protection of the rights of
the child in the context of migration,21 and invites States to take into account the
conclusions and recommendations of the study when designing and implementing
their migration policies;
7. Encourages States to protect victims of national and transnational
organized crime, including kidnapping, trafficking and, in some instances,
smuggling, through, where applicable, the implementation of programmes and
policies that guarantee protection and access to medical, psychosocial and legal
assistance;
8. Encourages Member States that have not already done so to enact
domestic legislation and to take further effective measures to combat trafficking in
persons and smuggling of migrants, recognizing that these crimes may endanger the
lives of migrants or subject them to harm, servitude or exploitation, which may also
include debt bondage, slavery, sexual exploitation or forced labour, and also
__________________
18 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
19 Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
20 Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
21 A/HRC/15/29.A/67/457/Add.2
111 12-63624
encourages Member States to strengthen international cooperation to combat such
trafficking and smuggling;
9. Stresses the importance of international, regional and bilateral
cooperation in the protection of the human rights of migrants, and therefore:
(a) Requests all States, international organizations and relevant stakeholders
to take into account in their policies and initiatives on migration issues the global
character of the migratory phenomenon and to give due consideration to
international, regional and bilateral cooperation in this field, including by
undertaking dialogues on migration that include countries of origin, transit and
destination, as well as civil society, including migrants, with a view to addressing,
in a comprehensive manner, inter alia, its causes and consequences and the
challenge of undocumented or irregular migration, granting priority to the protection
of the human rights of migrants;
(b) Encourages States to take the measures necessary to achieve policy
coherence on migration at the national, regional and international levels, including
by ensuring coordinated child protection policies and systems across borders that
are in full compliance with international human rights law;
(c) Also encourages States to further strengthen their cooperation in
protecting witnesses in cases of smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons;
(d) Calls upon the United Nations system and other relevant international
organizations and multilateral institutions to enhance their cooperation in the
development of methodologies for the collection and processing of statistical data
on international migration and the situation of migrants in countries of origin, transit
and destination and to assist Member States in their capacity-building efforts in this
regard;
10. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to the issue of migration
and development, in the preparation of the post-2015 development agenda, through,
inter alia, integrating a human rights perspective and mainstreaming a gender
perspective, and therefore:
(a) Requests Member States, the United Nations system, international
organizations, civil society and all relevant stakeholders, especially the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on the human rights of migrants and the Global Migration
Group, to ensure that the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development, which will take place during the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly in 2013, analyses the linkage between migration and development in a
balanced and comprehensive manner that includes, among others, a human rights
perspective;
(b) Recognizes the importance of the contribution of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Chair of the Committee on Migrant Workers and the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, as well as key development actors, to
the discussion at the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development;
11. Encourages States, relevant international organizations, civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, and the private sector to continue and to
enhance their dialogue, including through participation in the High-level DialogueA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 112
to be held in 2013 and other relevant international meetings, with a view to
strengthening public policies aimed at promoting and respecting human rights,
including those of migrants;
12. Invites the Chair of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to present an oral report on the
work of the Committee and to engage in an interactive dialogue with the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, under the item entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”, as a way to enhance communication between the
Assembly and the Committee;
13. Invites the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants to submit
his report to the General Assembly and to engage in an interactive dialogue at its
sixty-eighth session, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human
rights”;
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, submitted to the
General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, on the implementation of resolution
66/172 and on how the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families has influenced policy and
practice, where applicable, to strengthen the protection of migrants;22
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution and to
include in that report an analysis of how a human rights perspective can enhance the
design and implementation of international migration and development policies.
__________________
22 A/67/299.A/67/457/Add.2
113 12-63624
Draft resolution XII
Promotion of peace as a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of
all human rights by all
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 65/222 of 21 December 2010, and Human Rights
Council resolution 20/15 of 5 July 2012, entitled “Promotion of the right to peace”,1
Recalling also its resolution 39/11 of 12 November 1984, entitled “Declaration
on the Right of Peoples to Peace”, and the United Nations Millennium Declaration,2
Determined to foster strict respect for the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United Nations is to achieve
international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social,
cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion,
Underlining, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations, its full and active support for the United Nations and for the enhancement
of its role and effectiveness in strengthening international peace and security and
justice and in promoting the solution of international problems, as well as the
development of friendly relations and cooperation among States,
Reaffirming the obligation of all States to settle their international disputes by
peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice
are not endangered,
Emphasizing its objective of promoting better relations among all States and
contributing to setting up conditions in which their people can live in true and
lasting peace, free from any threat to or attempt against their security,
Reaffirming the obligation of all States to refrain in their international relations
from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of
the United Nations,
Reaffirming its commitment to peace and security and justice and the
continuing development of friendly relations and cooperation among States,
Rejecting the use of violence in pursuit of political aims, and stressing that
only peaceful political solutions can ensure a stable and democratic future for all
people around the world,
Reaffirming the importance of ensuring respect for the principles of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of States and non-
intervention in matters that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State, in accordance with the Charter and international law,
__________________
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and
corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
2 Resolution 55/2.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 114
Reaffirming also that all peoples have the right to self-determination, by virtue
of which they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development,
Reaffirming further the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations,3
Recognizing that peace and development are mutually reinforcing, including in
the prevention of armed conflict,
Affirming that human rights include social, economic and cultural rights and
the right to peace, a healthy environment and development, and that development is
in fact the realization of those rights,
Underlining the fact that the subjection of peoples to alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation constitutes a denial of fundamental rights, is contrary to
the Charter and is an impediment to the promotion of world peace and cooperation,
Recalling that everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which
the rights and freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights4 can
be fully realized,
Convinced of the aim of creating conditions of stability and well-being, which
are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations based on respect for
the principles of equal rights and self-determination of peoples,
Convinced also that life without war is the primary international prerequisite
for the material well-being, development and progress of countries and for the full
implementation of the rights and fundamental human freedoms proclaimed by the
United Nations,
Convinced further that international cooperation in the field of human rights
contributes to creating an international environment of peace and stability,
1. Reaffirms that the peoples of our planet have a sacred right to peace;
2. Also reaffirms that the preservation of the right of peoples to peace and
the promotion of its implementation constitute a fundamental obligation of all
States;
3. Stresses that peace is a vital requirement for the promotion and protection
of all human rights for all;
4. Also stresses that the deep fault line that divides human society between
the rich and the poor and the ever-increasing gap between the developed and
developing worlds pose a major threat to global prosperity, peace and security and
stability;
5. Emphasizes that the preservation and promotion of peace demands that
the policies of States be directed towards the elimination of the threat of war,
particularly nuclear war, the renunciation of the use or threat of use of force in
international relations and the settlement of international disputes by peaceful
means on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations;
__________________
3 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
4 Resolution 217 A (III).A/67/457/Add.2
115 12-63624
6. Affirms that all States should promote the establishment, maintenance
and strengthening of international peace and security and an international system
based on respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter and the promotion of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development and the
right of peoples to self-determination;
7. Urges all States to respect and to put into practice the purposes and
principles of the Charter in their relations with other States, irrespective of their
political, economic or social system and of their size, geographical location or level
of economic development;
8. Reaffirms the duty of all States, in accordance with the principles of the
Charter, to use peaceful means to settle any dispute to which they are parties and the
continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security, as a vital requirement for the promotion and protection of all human
rights of everyone and all peoples;
9. Welcomes the decision of the Human Rights Council, in its resolution
20/15,1
to establish an open-ended intergovernmental working group with the
mandate of progressively negotiating a draft United Nations declaration on the right
to peace;
10. Underlines the vital importance of education for peace as a tool to foster
the realization of the right of peoples to peace, and encourages States, the specialized
agencies of the United Nations system, and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to contribute actively to this endeavour;
11. Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and
procedures to continue to pay attention to the importance of mutual cooperation,
understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and protection of all human
rights;
12. Decides to continue consideration of the question of the promotion of the
right of peoples to peace at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 116
Draft resolution XIII
The right to food
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations and its importance for the
promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reaffirming also all previous resolutions and decisions on the right to food
adopted within the framework of the United Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 which provides that
everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for her or his health and
well-being, including food, the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger
and Malnutrition2 and the United Nations Millennium Declaration,3 in particular
Millennium Development Goal 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger by
2015,
Recalling also the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,4 in which the fundamental right of every person to be
free from hunger is recognized,
Bearing in mind the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World
Food Summit Plan of Action5 and the Declaration of the World Food Summit: five
years later, adopted in Rome on 13 June 2002,6
Reaffirming the concrete recommendations contained in the Voluntary
Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in
the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in November 2004,7
Reaffirming also the Five Rome Principles for Sustainable Global Food
Security contained in the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security,
adopted in Rome on 16 November 2009,8
Reaffirming further that all human rights are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, and that they must be treated globally, in a fair and
equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Reaffirming that a peaceful, stable and enabling political, social and economic
environment, at both the national and the international levels, is the essential
foundation that will enable States to give adequate priority to food and nutrition
security and poverty eradication,
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5-16 November 1974 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
3 See resolution 55/2.
4 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit,
13-17 November 1996 (WFS 96/REP), part one, appendix.
6 A/57/499, annex.
7 E/CN.4/2005/131, annex.
8 See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.A/67/457/Add.2
117 12-63624
Reiterating, as in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the
Declaration of the World Food Summit, that food should not be used as an
instrument of political or economic pressure, and reaffirming in this regard the
importance of international cooperation and solidarity, as well as the necessity of
refraining from unilateral measures that are not in accordance with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations and that endanger food and nutrition security,
Convinced that each State must adopt a strategy consistent with its resources
and capacities to achieve its individual goals in implementing the recommendations
contained in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food
Summit Plan of Action and, at the same time, cooperate regionally and
internationally in order to organize collective solutions to global issues of food and
nutrition security in a world of increasingly interlinked institutions, societies and
economies where coordinated efforts and shared responsibilities are essential,
Recognizing that the complex character of the global food crisis, in which the
right to adequate food is threatened to be violated on a substantive scale, is a
combination of several major factors, such as the global financial and economic
crisis, environmental degradation, desertification and the impacts of global climate
change, as well as natural disasters and the lack in many countries of the appropriate
technology, investment and capacity-building necessary to confront its impact,
particularly in developing countries, least developed countries and small island
developing States,
Resolved to act to ensure that the human rights perspective is taken into
account at the national, regional and international levels in measures to address the
global food crisis,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters,
diseases and pest infestations, as well as the negative impact of climate change, and
their increasing impact in recent years, which have resulted in substantial loss of life
and livelihood and threatened agricultural production and food and nutrition security,
in particular in developing countries,
Emphasizing that a multisector approach that integrates nutrition across all
sectors, including agriculture, health, water and sanitation, social protection, gender
and education, is critical to achieving global food and nutrition security and the
realization of the right to food,
Recalling the adoption of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible
Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National
Food Security at the thirty-eighth session of the Committee on World Food Security,
held on 11 May 2012, and the 144th session of the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Stressing the importance of reversing the continuing decline of official
development assistance devoted to agriculture, both in real terms and as a share of
total official development assistance,
Recognizing the importance of the protection and preservation of
agrobiodiversity in guaranteeing food security and the right to food for all,
Recognizing also the role of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations as the key United Nations agency for rural and agricultural
development and its work in supporting the efforts of Member States to achieve theA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 118
full realization of the right to food, including through its provision of technical
assistance to developing countries in support of the implementation of national
priority frameworks,
Taking note of the final Declaration adopted at the International Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations in Porto Alegre, Brazil, on 10 March 2006,9
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012,
Acknowledging the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis
established by the Secretary-General, and supporting the Secretary-General in his
continuing efforts in this regard, including continued engagement with Member
States and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the right to food,
1. Reaffirms that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of human
dignity and therefore requires the adoption of urgent measures at the national,
regional and international levels for its elimination;
2. Also reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and
nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and the fundamental right
of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully develop and maintain
his or her physical and mental capacities;
3. Considers it intolerable that, as estimated by the United Nations
Children’s Fund, more than one third of the children who die every year before the
age of 5 do so from hunger-related illness, that, as estimated by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the number of people who are
chronically undernourished is about 870 million worldwide, and that an additional
1 billion people are suffering from serious malnutrition, including as a result of the
global food crisis, while, according to the latter organization, the planet could
produce enough food to feed everyone around the world;
4. Expresses its concern at the fact that the effects of the world food crisis
continue to have serious consequences for the poorest and most vulnerable people,
particularly in developing countries, which have been further aggravated by the
world financial and economic crisis, and at the particular effects of this crisis on
many net food-importing countries, especially on least developed countries;
5. Expresses its deep concern that, according to the report of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations entitled The State of Food Insecurity
in the World 2012, 10 the number of hungry people in the world remains
unacceptably high, and 98 per cent of undernourished people in the world live in
developing countries;
6. Expresses its concern that women and girls are disproportionately
affected by hunger, food and nutrition insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of
__________________
9 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the International
Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 7-10 March 2006
(C 2006/REP), appendix G.
10 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, International Fund for Agricultural
Development and World Food Programme (Rome, October 2012).A/67/457/Add.2
119 12-63624
gender inequality and discrimination, that in many countries, girls are twice as
likely as boys to die from malnutrition and preventable childhood diseases and that
it is estimated that almost twice as many women as men suffer from malnutrition;
7. Encourages all States to take action to address gender inequality and
discrimination against women, in particular where they contribute to the
malnutrition of women and girls, including measures to ensure the full and equal
realization of the right to food and ensuring that women have equal access to
resources, including income, land and water and their ownership, as well as full and
equal access to education, science and technology, to enable them to feed
themselves and their families;
8. Encourages the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the
right to food to continue mainstreaming a gender perspective in the fulfilment of his
mandate, and encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and all other United Nations bodies and mechanisms addressing the right to
food and food insecurity to integrate a gender perspective into their relevant policies,
programmes and activities;
9. Reaffirms the need to ensure that programmes delivering safe and
nutritious food are inclusive of and accessible to persons with disabilities;
10. Calls upon all States and, if appropriate, relevant international
organizations to take measures and support programmes which are aimed at
combating undernutrition in mothers and children and the irreversible effects of
chronic undernutrition in early childhood, in particular from pregnancy to the age of
two years;
11. Encourages all States to take steps with a view to progressively
achieving the full realization of the right to food, including steps to promote the
conditions for everyone to be free from hunger and, as soon as possible, to enjoy
fully the right to food, and to create and adopt national plans to combat hunger;
12. Recognizes the advances reached through South-South cooperation in
developing countries and regions in connection with food security and the
development of agricultural production for the full realization of the right to food;
13. Stresses that improving access to productive resources and public
investment in rural development are essential for eradicating hunger and poverty, in
particular in developing countries, including through the promotion of investments
in appropriate small-scale irrigation and water management technologies in order to
reduce vulnerability to droughts;
14. Recognizes the critical contribution made by the fisheries sector to the
realization of the right to food and to food security, and the contribution of
small-scale fishers to the local food security of coastal communities;11
15. Recognizes that 80 per cent of hungry people live in rural areas and
50 per cent are small-scale farm-holders, and that these people are especially
vulnerable to food insecurity, given the increasing cost of inputs and the fall in farm
incomes; that access to land, water, seeds and other natural resources is an
increasing challenge for poor producers; that sustainable and gender-sensitive
agricultural policies are important tools for promoting land and agrarian reform,
__________________
11 See A/67/268.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 120
rural credit and insurance, technical assistance and other associated measures to
achieve food security and rural development; and that support by States for small
farmers, fishing communities and local enterprises, including through the
facilitation of access of their products to national and international markets and
empowerment of small producers, particularly women, in value chains, is a key
element for food security and the provision of the right to food;
16. Stresses the importance of fighting hunger in rural areas, including
through national efforts supported by international partnerships to stop
desertification and land degradation and through investments and public policies
that are specifically appropriate to the risk of drylands, and in this regard calls for
the full implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa;12
17. Urges States that have not yet done so to favourably consider becoming
parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity 13 and to consider becoming
parties to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture14 as a matter of priority;
18. Recalls the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples,15 acknowledges that many indigenous organizations and representatives of
indigenous peoples have expressed in different forums their deep concerns over the
obstacles and challenges they face in achieving the full enjoyment of the right to
food, and calls upon States to take special actions to combat the root causes of the
disproportionately high level of hunger and malnutrition among indigenous peoples
and the continuous discrimination against them;
19. Notes the need to further examine various concepts such as, inter alia,
“food sovereignty” and their relation with food security and the right to food,
bearing in mind the need to avoid any negative impact on the enjoyment of the right
to food for all people at all times;
20. Requests all States and private actors, as well as international
organizations within their respective mandates, to take fully into account the need to
promote the effective realization of the right to food for all, including in the ongoing
negotiations in different fields;
21. Recognizes the need to strengthen national commitment as well as
international assistance, upon the request of and in cooperation with the affected
countries, towards the full realization and protection of the right to food, and in
particular to develop national protection mechanisms for people forced to leave their
homes and land because of hunger or humanitarian emergencies affecting the
enjoyment of the right to food;
22. Stresses the need to make efforts to mobilize and optimize the allocation
and utilization of technical and financial resources from all sources, including
external debt relief for developing countries, and to reinforce national actions to
implement sustainable food security policies;
__________________
12 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
13 Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
14 Ibid., vol. 2400, No. 43345.
15 Resolution 61/295, annex.A/67/457/Add.2
121 12-63624
23. Calls for the early conclusion and a successful, development-oriented
outcome of the Doha Round of trade negotiations of the World Trade Organization
as a contribution to creating international conditions that permit the full realization
of the right to food;
24. Stresses that all States should make all efforts to ensure that their
international policies of a political and economic nature, including international
trade agreements, do not have a negative impact on the right to food in other
countries;
25. Recalls the importance of the New York Declaration on Action against
Hunger and Poverty, and recommends the continuation of efforts aimed at
identifying additional sources of financing for the fight against hunger and poverty,
as well as non-communicable diseases;
26. Recognizes that the promises made at the World Food Summit in 1996 to
halve the number of persons who are undernourished are not being fulfilled, while
recognizing the efforts of Member States in this regard, and once again invites all
international financial and development institutions, as well as the relevant United
Nations agencies and funds, to give priority to and provide the necessary funding to
realize the aim of halving by 2015 the proportion of people who suffer from hunger,
as well as the right to food as set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food
Security5
and the United Nations Millennium Declaration;3
27. Reaffirms that integrating food and nutritional support, with the goal that
all people at all times will have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet
their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life, is part of a
comprehensive effort to improve public health, including the response to the spread
of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other communicable diseases;
28. Urges States to give adequate priority in their development strategies and
expenditures to the realization of the right to food;
29. Stresses the importance of international cooperation and development
assistance as an effective contribution both to the expansion and improvement of
agriculture and its environmental sustainability, food production, breeding projects
on diversity of crops and livestock, and institutional innovations such as community
seed banks, farmer field schools and seed fairs and to the provision of humanitarian
food assistance in activities related to emergency situations, for the realization of
the right to food and the achievement of sustainable food security, while recognizing
that each country has the primary responsibility for ensuring the implementation of
national programmes and strategies in this regard;
30. Also stresses that States parties to the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 16 should
consider implementing that agreement in a manner that is supportive of food
security, while being mindful of the obligation of Member States to promote and
protect the right to food;
31. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant
stakeholders to support national efforts aimed at responding rapidly to the food
__________________
16 See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade
Negotiations, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales
No. GATT/1994-7).A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 122
crises currently occurring across Africa, in particular in the Horn of Africa, and
expresses its deep concern that funding shortfalls are forcing the World Food
Programme to cut operations across different regions, including Southern Africa;
32. Invites all relevant international organizations, including the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, to continue to promote policies and projects
that have a positive impact on the right to food, to ensure that partners respect the
right to food in the implementation of common projects, to support strategies of
Member States aimed at the fulfilment of the right to food and to avoid any actions
that could have a negative impact on the realization of the right to food;
33. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special
Rapporteur;11
34. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, as
extended by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 13/4 of 24 March 2010;17
35. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide all the human and financial
resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur;
36. Welcomes the work already done by the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights in promoting the right to adequate food, in particular its General
Comment No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food (article 11 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights),18 in which the Committee
affirmed, inter alia, that the right to adequate food is indivisibly linked to the
inherent dignity of the human person and is indispensable for the fulfilment of other
human rights enshrined in the International Bill of Human Rights, and is also
inseparable from social justice, requiring the adoption of appropriate economic,
environmental and social policies, at both the national and the international levels,
oriented to the eradication of poverty and the fulfilment of all human rights for all;
37. Recalls General Comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights on the right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the
Covenant),19 in which the Committee noted, inter alia, the importance of ensuring
sustainable access to water resources for human consumption and agriculture in
realization of the right to adequate food;
38. Reaffirms that the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive
Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security,
adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations in November 2004,7
represent a practical tool to promote the realization of
the right to food for all, contribute to the achievement of food security and thus
provide an additional instrument in the attainment of internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration;
__________________
17 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and
corrigendum (A/65/53 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
18 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 2 and
corrigendum (E/2000/22 and Corr.1), annex V.
19 Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.A/67/457/Add.2
123 12-63624
39. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special
Rapporteur in his task, to supply all necessary information requested by him and to
give serious consideration to responding favourably to the requests of the Special
Rapporteur to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more
effectively;
40. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session an interim report on the implementation of the present
resolution and to continue his work, including by examining the emerging issues
with regard to the realization of the right to food within his existing mandate;
41. Invites Governments, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, treaty bodies, civil society actors and non-governmental organizations,
as well as the private sector, to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the
fulfilment of his mandate, inter alia, through the submission of comments and
suggestions on ways and means of realizing the right to food;
42. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its sixty-eighth
session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 124
Draft resolution XIV
Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of a democratic and
equitable international order, including resolution 66/159 of 19 December 2011, and
Human Rights Council resolutions 18/6 of 29 September 2011 1 and 21/9 of
24 September 2012,2
Reaffirming the commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations to promote
universal respect for, and observance and protection of, all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
other instruments relating to human rights and international law,
Affirming that the enhancement of international cooperation for the promotion
and protection of all human rights should continue to be carried out in full
conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter and international law as
set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter and, inter alia, with full respect for
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence, the non-use of force or the
threat of force in international relations and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State,
Recalling the Preamble to the Charter, in particular the determination to
reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person and in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small,
Reaffirming that everyone is entitled to a social and international order in
which the rights and freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights3 can be fully realized,
Reaffirming also the determination expressed in the Preamble to the Charter to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources
of international law can be maintained, to promote social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom, to practise tolerance and good-neighbourliness,
and to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social
advancement of all peoples,
Stressing that the responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social
issues, as well as threats to international peace and security, must be shared among
the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally, and that in this
regard the central role must be played by the United Nations, as the most universal
and representative organization in the world,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the
aspirations of all peoples for an international order based on the principles enshrined
in the Charter, including promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all and respect for the principle of equal rights and
__________________
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and
corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
2 Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
3 Resolution 217 A (III).A/67/457/Add.2
125 12-63624
self-determination of peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality, the rule of law,
pluralism, development, better standards of living and solidarity,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights is essential for the full achievement of the purposes of the United
Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all human rights,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaims that all
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any kind,
such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or
social origin, property, birth or other status,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and that
democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine their
own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in
all aspects of their lives,
Recognizing that the promotion and protection of human rights should be
based on the principle of cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at
strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their human rights
obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Emphasizing that democracy is not only a political concept, but that it also has
economic and social dimensions,
Recognizing that democracy, respect for all human rights, including the right
to development, transparent and accountable governance and administration in all
sectors of society, and effective participation by civil society are an essential part of
the necessary foundations for the realization of social and people-centred
sustainable development,
Noting with concern that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance may be aggravated by, inter alia, inequitable distribution of wealth,
marginalization and social exclusion,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations could
contribute greatly to the enhancement of international cooperation at all levels,
Underlining the fact that it is imperative for the international community to
ensure that globalization becomes a positive force for all the world’s people, and
that only through broad and sustained efforts, based on our common humanity in all
its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable,
Deeply concerned that the current global economic, financial, energy and food
crises, resulting from a combination of several major factors, including
macroeconomic and other factors, such as environmental degradation,
desertification and global climate change, natural disasters and the lack of financial
resources and the technology necessary to confront their negative impact in
developing countries, particularly in the least developed countries and small island
developing States, represent a global scenario that is threatening the adequate
enjoyment of all human rights and widening the gap between developed and
developing countries,A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 126
Stressing that efforts to make globalization fully inclusive and equitable must
include policies and measures, at the global level, that correspond to the needs of
developing countries and countries with economies in transition and are formulated
and implemented with their effective participation,
Stressing also the need for adequate financing of and technology transfer to
developing countries, in particular the landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States, including to support their efforts to adapt to climate
change,
Having listened to the peoples of the world, and recognizing their aspirations
to justice, to equality of opportunity for all, to the enjoyment of their human rights,
including the right to development, to live in peace and freedom and to equal
participation without discrimination in economic, social, cultural, civil and political
life,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 on institution-building of the
Council and 5/2 on the Code of Conduct for Special Procedures Mandate Holders of
the Council, both of 18 June 2007,4 and stressing that all mandate holders shall
discharge their duties in accordance with those resolutions and the annexes thereto,
Resolved to take all measures within its power to secure a democratic and
equitable international order,
1. Affirms that everyone is entitled to a democratic and equitable
international order;
2. Also affirms that a democratic and equitable international order fosters
the full realization of all human rights for all;
3. Calls upon all Member States to fulfil their commitment expressed in
Durban, South Africa, during the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance to maximize the benefits of
globalization through, inter alia, the strengthening and enhancement of international
cooperation to increase equality of opportunities for trade, economic growth and
sustainable development, global communications through the use of new
technologies and increased intercultural exchange through the preservation and
promotion of cultural diversity, 5 and reiterates that only through broad and
sustained efforts to create a shared future based upon our common humanity and all
its diversity can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable;
4. Affirms that a democratic and equitable international order requires, inter
alia, the realization of the following:
(a) The right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they can
freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and
cultural development;
(b) The right of peoples and nations to permanent sovereignty over their
natural wealth and resources;
(c) The right of every human person and all peoples to development;
__________________
4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/62/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
5 See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.A/67/457/Add.2
127 12-63624
(d) The right of all peoples to peace;
(e) The right to an international economic order based on equal participation
in the decision-making process, interdependence, mutual interest, solidarity and
cooperation among all States;
(f) International solidarity, as a right of peoples and individuals;
(g) The promotion and consolidation of transparent, democratic, just and
accountable international institutions in all areas of cooperation, in particular
through the implementation of the principle of full and equal participation in their
respective decision-making mechanisms;
(h) The right to equitable participation of all, without any discrimination, in
domestic and global decision-making;
(i) The principle of equitable regional and gender-balanced representation in
the composition of the staff of the United Nations system;
(j) The promotion of a free, just, effective and balanced international
information and communications order, based on international cooperation for the
establishment of a new equilibrium and greater reciprocity in the international flow
of information, in particular correcting the inequalities in the flow of information to
and from developing countries;
(k) Respect for cultural diversity and the cultural rights of all, since this
enhances cultural pluralism, contributes to a wider exchange of knowledge and
understanding of cultural backgrounds, advances the application and enjoyment of
universally accepted human rights across the world and fosters stable, friendly
relations among peoples and nations worldwide;
(l) The right of every person and all peoples to a healthy environment and to
enhanced international cooperation that responds effectively to the needs for
assistance of national efforts to adapt to climate change, particularly in developing
countries, and that promotes the fulfilment of international agreements in the field
of mitigation;
(m) The promotion of equitable access to benefits from the international
distribution of wealth through enhanced international cooperation, in particular in
economic, commercial and financial international relations;
(n) The enjoyment by everyone of ownership of the common heritage of
mankind in connection to the public right of access to culture;
(o) The shared responsibility of the nations of the world for managing
worldwide economic and social development, as well as threats to international
peace and security, that should be exercised multilaterally;
5. Stresses the importance of preserving the rich and diverse nature of the
international community of nations and peoples, as well as respect for national and
regional particularities and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds, in
the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights;
6. Also stresses that all human rights are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated and that the international community must treat
human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the
same emphasis, and reaffirms that, while the significance of national and regionalA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 128
particularities and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds must be
borne in mind, it is the duty of States, regardless of their political, economic and
cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
7. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order
based on inclusion, justice, equality and equity, human dignity, mutual
understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and universal
human rights, and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
8. Reaffirms that all States should promote the establishment, maintenance
and strengthening of international peace and security and, to that end, should do
their utmost to achieve general and complete disarmament under effective
international control, as well as to ensure that the resources released by effective
disarmament measures are used for comprehensive development, in particular that
of the developing countries;
9. Also reaffirms the need to continue working urgently for the
establishment of an international economic order based on equity, sovereign equality,
interdependence, common interest and cooperation among all States, irrespective of
their economic and social systems, which shall correct inequalities and redress
existing injustices, make it possible to eliminate the widening gap between the
developed and the developing countries and ensure steadily accelerating economic
and social development and peace and justice for present and future generations;
10. Further reaffirms that the international community should devise ways
and means to remove the current obstacles and meet the challenges to the full
realization of all human rights and to prevent the continuation of human rights
violations resulting therefrom throughout the world;
11. Urges States to continue their efforts, through enhanced international
cooperation, towards the promotion of a democratic and equitable international
order;
12. Takes note of the report of the Independent Expert on the promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order;6
13. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide all the human and financial
resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Independent
Expert;
14. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Independent
Expert in his task, to supply all necessary information requested by him and to
consider responding favourably to the requests of the Independent Expert to visit
their countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more effectively;
15. Requests the Human Rights Council, the human rights treaty bodies, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the special
mechanisms extended by the Council and the Human Rights Council Advisory
Committee to pay due attention, within their respective mandates, to the present
resolution and to make contributions towards its implementation;
__________________
6 A/67/277 and Corr.1.A/67/457/Add.2
129 12-63624
16. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to build upon the issue
of the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of Member States, United Nations organs, bodies and components,
intergovernmental organizations, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and
non-governmental organizations, and to disseminate it on the widest possible basis;
18. Requests the Independent Expert to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session an interim report on the implementation of the present
resolution and to continue his work;
19. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its sixty-eighth session
under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 130
Draft resolution XV
Moratorium on the use of the death penalty
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child,3
Reaffirming its resolutions 62/149 of 18 December 2007, 63/168 of
18 December 2008 and 65/206 of 21 December 2010 on the question of a
moratorium on the use of the death penalty, in which the General Assembly called
upon States that still maintain the death penalty to establish a moratorium on
executions with a view to abolishing it,
Welcoming Human Rights Council decision 18/117 of 28 September 2011,4
Mindful that any miscarriage or failure of justice in the implementation of the
death penalty is irreversible and irreparable,
Convinced that a moratorium on the use of the death penalty contributes to
respect for human dignity and to the enhancement and progressive development of
human rights, and considering that there is no conclusive evidence of the deterrent
value of the death penalty,
Noting ongoing local and national debates and regional initiatives on the death
penalty, as well as the readiness of an increasing number of Member States to make
available to the public information on the use of the death penalty,
Noting also the technical cooperation among Member States in relation to
moratoriums on the death penalty,
1. Expresses its deep concern about the continued application of the death
penalty;
2. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 65/2065 and the recommendations contained therein;
3. Also welcomes the steps taken by some Member States to reduce the
number of offences for which the death penalty may be imposed and the decisions
made by an increasing number of States, at all levels of Government, to apply a
moratorium on executions, followed in many cases by the abolition of the death
penalty;
4. Calls upon all States:
__________________
1 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and
corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. III.
5 A/67/226.A/67/457/Add.2
131 12-63624
(a) To respect international standards that provide safeguards guaranteeing
protection of the rights of those facing the death penalty, in particular the minimum
standards, as set out in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/50 of 25 May 1984, as well as to provide the Secretary-General with
information in this regard;
(b) To make available relevant information with regard to their use of the
death penalty, inter alia, the number of persons sentenced to death, the number of
persons on death row and the number of executions carried out, which can
contribute to possible informed and transparent national and international debates,
including on the obligations of States pertaining to the use of the death penalty;
(c) To progressively restrict the use of the death penalty and not to impose
capital punishment for offences committed by persons below eighteen years of age
and on pregnant women;
(d) To reduce the number of offences for which the death penalty may be
imposed;
(e) To establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the
death penalty;
5. Calls upon States which have abolished the death penalty not to
reintroduce it, and encourages them to share their experience in this regard;
6. Also calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider acceding to
or ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty;6
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its sixty-ninth session
under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
__________________
6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1642, No. 14668.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 132
Draft resolution XVI
Committee against Torture
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment,1
Welcoming the work of the Committee against Torture, and encouraging
sustained efforts by the Committee to improve the efficiency of its working methods,
Regretting the persistent backlog of reports of States parties and individual
communications awaiting consideration, which prevents the Committee from
considering reports and communications in a timely manner and without undue
delay,
Recalling its resolutions 66/254 of 23 February 2012 and 66/295 of
17 September 2012 on the intergovernmental process on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system, and
recognizing in this regard that a long-term solution to the problem of the increasing
backlog of reports of States parties to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment awaiting review by the
Committee may be found in this context,
Noting the request of the Committee against Torture that the General Assembly
authorize an extension of its meeting time by two weeks in 2013 and in 2014,2
Noting also that the Committee has only ten members and normally meets for
only two sessions of three weeks a year,
Noting further that the estimated budgetary requirements of the requested
extension of meeting time for 2014 will be dealt with in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015, while bearing in mind the need to
make the best possible use of resources,
1. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made so far by the Committee
against Torture to improve the efficiency of its working methods, including with a
view to further harmonizing the working methods of the treaty bodies, and urges the
Committee to continue its activities in this regard;
2. Decides to authorize the Committee, without prejudice to the
intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing
the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system, to continue to meet
for an additional week per session as a temporary measure, with effect from May
2013 until the end of November 2014, in order to address the backlog of reports of
States parties and individual complaints awaiting consideration.
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 44 (A/67/44),
paras. 23-29 and annexes IX and X.A/67/457/Add.2
133 12-63624
Draft resolution XVII
Missing persons
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes, principles and provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Guided also by the principles and norms of international humanitarian law, in
particular the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 19491 and the Additional Protocols
thereto of 1977,2 as well as international standards of human rights, in particular the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,3 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 4 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,4
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women,5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child6 and the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on
25 June 1993,7
Welcoming the entry into force on 23 December 2010 of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,8
Recalling all previous relevant resolutions on missing persons adopted by the
General Assembly, as well as the resolutions and decisions adopted by the
Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council,
Noting with deep concern that armed conflicts are continuing in various parts
of the world, often resulting in serious violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law,
Noting that the issue of persons reported missing in connection with
international or non-international armed conflicts, in particular those who are
victims of serious violations of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, continues to have a negative impact on efforts to put an end to
those conflicts and inflicts grievous suffering on the families of missing persons,
and stressing in this regard the need to address the issue, inter alia, from a
humanitarian and rule of law perspective,
Considering that the problem of missing persons may raise questions of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, as appropriate,
Bearing in mind that cases of missing persons involve conduct that may
constitute criminal offences, and stressing the importance of ending impunity for
violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law with
respect to missing persons,
Cognizant that States that are parties to an armed conflict have a responsibility
for countering the phenomenon of missing persons, taking all appropriate measures
__________________
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
2 Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
3 Resolution 217 A (III).
4 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6 Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7 A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
8 Resolution 61/177, annex.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 134
to prevent persons from going missing and determining the fate of missing persons
and for recognizing their accountability as regards implementing the relevant
mechanisms, policies and laws,
Bearing in mind the effective search for and identification of missing persons
using forensic sciences, and recognizing that great technological progress has been
made in this field, including DNA forensic analysis, which can significantly assist
efforts to identify missing persons and to investigate violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
Recognizing that the establishment and effective work of competent national
institutions can play a crucial role in clarifying the fate of missing persons in
connection with armed conflict,
Recognizing also the importance of addressing the legal situation of missing
persons in connection with armed conflict and supporting their family members in
national policies that include a gender perspective, as appropriate,
Recognizing further that respect for and implementation of international
humanitarian law can reduce the number of cases of missing persons in armed
conflict,
Stressing the importance of measures to prevent persons from going missing in
connection with armed conflict, which may include enacting national legislation,
producing and providing proper means of identification, the establishment of
information bureaux, grave registration services and registers of deaths, and
ensuring accountability in cases of the missing,
Taking note of the four-year plan of action for the implementation of
international humanitarian law adopted by the Thirty-first International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 28 November to
1 December 2011, which, inter alia, invites States, as part of its fourth objective, to
consider, in the light of the right of families to know the fate of their relatives,
enacting appropriate legislation or arrangements to ensure adequate participation
and representation of victims and their families as well as access to justice and
protection for victims and witnesses, especially women and children, in proceedings
before their courts and in other transitional justice mechanisms concerning serious
violations of international humanitarian law,
Taking note also of the report of the Human Rights Council Advisory
Committee on best practices in the matter of missing persons,9
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General prepared
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 65/210 of 21 December 2010,10
Noting with appreciation the ongoing international and regional efforts to
address the question of missing persons and the initiatives undertaken by
international and regional organizations in this field,
1. Urges States to strictly observe and to respect and ensure respect for the
rules of international humanitarian law, as set out in the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 19491
and, where applicable, in the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977;2
__________________
9 A/HRC/16/70.
10 A/67/267.A/67/457/Add.2
135 12-63624
2. Calls upon States that are parties to an armed conflict to take all
appropriate measures to prevent persons from going missing in connection with the
armed conflict, to account for persons reported missing as a result of such a
situation and to ensure the effective investigation and prosecution of offences linked
to missing persons, consistent with their international obligations;
3. Reaffirms the right of families to know the fate of their relatives reported
missing in connection with armed conflicts;
4. Also reaffirms that each party to an armed conflict, as soon as
circumstances permit and, at the latest, from the end of active hostilities, shall
search for the persons who have been reported missing by an adverse party;
5. Calls upon States that are parties to an armed conflict to take all
necessary measures, in a timely manner, to determine the identity and fate of
persons reported missing in connection with the armed conflict and, to the greatest
extent possible, to provide their family members, through appropriate channels, with
all relevant information that they have on their fate, including their whereabouts or,
if they are dead, the circumstances and cause of their death;
6. Recognizes, in this regard, the need for appropriate means of
identification and for the collection, protection and management of data on missing
persons and unidentified remains according to international and national legal norms
and standards, and urges States to cooperate with each other and with other
concerned actors working in this area, inter alia, by providing all relevant and
appropriate information related to missing persons;
7. Requests States to pay the utmost attention to cases of children reported
missing in connection with armed conflicts and to take appropriate measures to
search for and identify those children and to reunite them with their families;
8. Invites States that are parties to an armed conflict to cooperate fully with
the International Committee of the Red Cross in establishing the fate of missing
persons and to adopt a comprehensive approach to this issue, including all such
legal and practical measures and coordination mechanisms as may be necessary,
based on humanitarian considerations only;
9. Urges States that are parties to an armed conflict to cooperate, consistent
with their international obligations, in order to effectively solve cases of missing
persons, including by providing mutual assistance in terms of information-sharing,
victim assistance, location and identification of missing persons and recovery,
identification and return of human remains;
10. Urges States, and encourages intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, to take all necessary measures at the national, regional and
international levels to address the problem of persons reported missing in
connection with armed conflicts and to provide appropriate assistance as requested
by the concerned States, and welcomes in this regard the establishment and efforts
of commissions and working groups on missing persons;
11. Calls upon States, without prejudice to their efforts to determine the fate
of persons reported missing in connection with armed conflicts, to take appropriate
steps with regard to the legal situation of missing persons and the needs and
accompaniment of their family members, in such fields as social welfare,A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 136
psychological and psychosocial support, financial matters, family law and property
rights;
12. Invites States, national institutions and, as appropriate, intergovernmental,
international and non-governmental organizations to further their engagement in
order to follow forensic best practices as they apply to preventing and resolving
cases of missing persons in connection with armed conflict;
13. Also invites States, national institutions and, as appropriate,
intergovernmental, international and non-governmental organizations to ensure the
development and proper management of archives pertaining to missing persons and
unidentified remains in connection with armed conflict, as well as access to those
archives in accordance with relevant applicable laws and regulations;
14. Stresses the need to address the issue of missing persons as a part of
peace and peacebuilding processes, with reference to all justice and rule of law
mechanisms, including the judiciary, parliamentary commissions and truth-finding
mechanisms, on the basis of transparency, accountability and public involvement
and participation;
15. Invites relevant human rights mechanisms and procedures, as appropriate,
to address the problem of persons reported missing in connection with armed
conflicts in their forthcoming reports to the General Assembly;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Human Rights Council at
its relevant session and to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a
comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution, including
relevant recommendations;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of all Governments, the competent United Nations bodies, the specialized
agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and international humanitarian
organizations;
18. Decides to consider the question at its sixty-ninth session.A/67/457/Add.2
137 12-63624
Draft resolution XVIII
Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization,
discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against persons,
based on religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the commitment made by all States under the Charter of the
United Nations to promote and encourage universal respect for and observance of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as to, inter alia,
religion or belief,
Reaffirming also the obligation of States to prohibit discrimination and
violence on the basis of religion or belief and to implement measures to guarantee
the equal and effective protection of the law,
Reaffirming further that all human rights are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated,
Reaffirming that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights1
provides, inter alia, that everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion or belief, which shall include freedom to have or to adopt a
religion or belief of one’s choice and freedom, either alone or in community with
others and in public or private, to manifest one’s religion or belief in worship,
observance, practice and teaching,
Reaffirming the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression and full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart
information can play in strengthening democracy and combating religious
intolerance, and also that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression carries
with it special duties and responsibilities, in accordance with article 19 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Expressing deep concern at those acts that advocate religious hatred and
thereby undermine the spirit of tolerance,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Reaffirming that violence can never be an acceptable response to acts of
intolerance on the basis of religion or belief,
Welcoming Human Rights Council resolutions 16/18 of 24 March 20112 and
19/25 of 23 March 20123 and General Assembly resolution 66/167 of 19 December
2011,
Deeply concerned about incidents of intolerance, discrimination and violence
against persons based on their religion or belief in all regions of the world,
__________________
1 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53),
chap. II, sect. A.
3 Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III,
sect. A.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 138
Deploring any advocacy of discrimination or violence on the basis of religion
or belief,
Strongly deploring all acts of violence against persons on the basis of their
religion or belief, as well as any such acts directed against their homes, businesses,
properties, schools, cultural centres or places of worship,
Strongly deploring, further, all attacks on and in religious places, sites and
shrines in violation of international law, in particular human rights law and
international humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of relics and
monuments,
Concerned about actions that wilfully exploit tensions or target individuals on
the basis of their religion or belief,
Expressing deep concern at the instances of intolerance, discrimination and
acts of violence occurring in the world, including cases motivated by discrimination
against persons belonging to religious minorities, in addition to the negative
projection of the followers of religions and the enforcement of measures that
specifically discriminate against persons on the basis of religion or belief,
Expressing concern at the growing manifestations of intolerance based on
religion or belief that can generate hatred and violence among individuals from and
within different nations, that may have serious implications at the national, regional
and international levels, and in this regard emphasizing the importance of respect
for religious and cultural diversity, as well as interfaith and intercultural dialogue
aimed at promoting a culture of tolerance and respect among individuals, societies
and nations,
Recognizing the valuable contribution of people of all religions or beliefs to
humanity and the contribution that dialogue among religious groups can make
towards an improved awareness and understanding of the common values shared by
all humankind,
Underlining the fact that States, regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important role to play in
promoting tolerance and respect for religious and cultural diversity and in the
universal promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of religion
or belief,
Underlining also the importance of raising awareness about different cultures
and religions or beliefs and of education in the promotion of tolerance, which
involves the acceptance by the public of and its respect for religious and cultural
diversity, including with regard to religious expression, and underlining further the
fact that education, in particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful way to
promoting tolerance and the elimination of discrimination based on religion or
belief,
Recognizing that working together to enhance the implementation of existing
legal regimes that protect individuals against discrimination and hate crimes,
increase interfaith and intercultural efforts and expand human rights education is an
important first step in combating incidents of intolerance, discrimination and
violence against individuals on the basis of religion or belief,A/67/457/Add.2
139 12-63624
Welcoming the inauguration of the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz International
Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue in Vienna, established on the
basis of the purposes and principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,4 and acknowledging the important role that the Centre is expected to
play as a platform for the enhancement of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
Welcoming also, in this regard, all international, regional and national
initiatives aimed at promoting interreligious, intercultural and interfaith harmony
and combating discrimination against individuals on the basis of religion or belief,
including the launching of the Istanbul Process, and taking note of the recent
initiative of the chairmanship of Albania of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe under the theme “United in diversity” and the holding of five
regional workshops by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Austria, Chile, Kenya, Morocco and Thailand on related issues,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on steps taken by States
to combat intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination,
incitement to violence and violence against persons, based on religion or belief;5
2. Expresses deep concern at the continued serious instances of derogatory
stereotyping, negative profiling and stigmatization of persons based on their religion
or belief, as well as programmes and agendas pursued by extremist individuals,
organizations and groups aimed at creating and perpetuating negative stereotypes
about religious groups, in particular when condoned by Governments;
3. Expresses concern that the number of incidents of religious intolerance,
discrimination and related violence, as well as of negative stereotyping of
individuals on the basis of religion or belief, continues to rise in the world, which
may have serious implications at the national, regional and international levels,
condemns, in this context, any advocacy of religious hatred against individuals that
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, and urges States to
take effective measures, as set forth in the present resolution and consistent with
their obligations under international human rights law, to address and combat such
incidents;
4. Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use of print,
audiovisual or electronic media or any other means;
5. Recognizes that the open public debate of ideas, as well as interfaith and
intercultural dialogue, at the local, national and international levels can be among
the best protections against religious intolerance and can play a positive role in
strengthening democracy and combating religious hatred, and expresses its
conviction that a continuing dialogue on these issues can help to overcome existing
misperceptions;
6. Also recognizes the strong need for global awareness about the possible
serious implications of incitement to discrimination and violence, that may have
serious implications at the national, regional and international levels, and urges all
Member States to make renewed efforts to develop educational systems that
promote all human rights and fundamental freedoms that enhance tolerance for
__________________
4 Resolution 217 A (III).
5 A/67/296.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 140
religious and cultural diversity, which is fundamental to promoting tolerant,
peaceful and harmonious multicultural societies;
7. Calls upon all States to take the following actions, as called for by the
Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to foster a domestic
environment of religious tolerance, peace and respect by:
(a) Encouraging the creation of collaborative networks to build mutual
understanding, promoting dialogue and inspiring constructive action towards shared
policy goals and the pursuit of tangible outcomes, such as servicing projects in the
fields of education, health, conflict prevention, employment, integration and media
education;
(b) Creating an appropriate mechanism within Governments to, inter alia,
identify and address potential areas of tension between members of different
religious communities, and assisting with conflict prevention and mediation;
(c) Encouraging the training of Government officials in effective outreach
strategies;
(d) Encouraging the efforts of leaders to discuss within their communities
the causes of discrimination, and developing strategies to counter those causes;
(e) Speaking out against intolerance, including advocacy of religious hatred
that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence;
(f) Adopting measures to criminalize incitement to imminent violence based
on religion or belief;
(g) Understanding the need to combat denigration and the negative religious
stereotyping of persons, as well as incitement to religious hatred, by strategizing and
harmonizing actions at the local, national, regional and international levels through,
inter alia, education and awareness-raising;
(h) Recognizing that the open, constructive and respectful debate of ideas, as
well as interfaith and intercultural dialogue at the local, national, regional and
international levels, can play a positive role in combating religious hatred,
incitement and violence;
8. Calls upon all States:
(a) To take effective measures to ensure that public functionaries, in the
conduct of their public duties, do not discriminate against an individual on the basis
of religion or belief;
(b) To foster religious freedom and pluralism by promoting the ability of
members of all religious communities to manifest their religion and to contribute
openly and on an equal footing to society;
(c) To encourage the representation and meaningful participation of
individuals, irrespective of their religion or belief, in all sectors of society;
(d) To make a strong effort to counter religious profiling, which is
understood to be the invidious use of religion as a criterion in conducting
questioning, searches and other law enforcement investigative procedures;
9. Also calls upon all States to adopt measures and policies to promote full
respect for and protection of places of worship and religious sites, cemeteries andA/67/457/Add.2
141 12-63624
shrines, and to take protective measures in cases where they are vulnerable to
vandalism or destruction;
10. Calls for strengthened international efforts to foster a global dialogue for
the promotion of a culture of tolerance and peace at all levels, based on respect for
human rights and diversity of religions and beliefs;
11. Encourages all States to consider providing updates on efforts made in
this regard as part of ongoing reporting to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and in this respect requests the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to include those updates in her reports to the
Human Rights Council;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session a report that includes information provided by the High
Commissioner on steps taken by States to combat intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against persons,
based on religion or belief, as set forth in the present resolution.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 142
Draft resolution XIX
Freedom of religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it proclaimed
the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling also article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 1 article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2 and other
relevant human rights provisions,
Recalling further its previous resolutions on the elimination of all forms of
intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief, including resolution
66/168 of 19 December 2011, and Human Rights Council resolution 19/8 of
22 March 2012,3
Recognizing the important work carried out by the Human Rights Committee
in providing guidance with respect to the scope of freedom of religion or belief,
Considering that religion or belief, for those who profess either, is one of the
fundamental elements in their conception of life and that freedom of religion or
belief should be fully respected and guaranteed,
Reaffirming that everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion or belief, which includes the freedom to have or not to have, or to adopt, a
religion or belief of one’s own choice, and the freedom, either alone or in
community with others and in public or private, to manifest one’s religion or belief
in teaching, practice, worship and observance,
Deeply concerned at continuing acts of intolerance and violence based on
religion or belief against individuals and members of religious communities and
religious minorities around the world and at the limited progress that has been made
in the elimination of all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion
or belief, and believing that further intensified efforts are therefore required to
promote and protect the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or
belief and to eliminate all forms of hatred, intolerance and discrimination based on
religion or belief, as also noted at the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa,
from 31 August to 8 September 2001, as well as at the Durban Review Conference,
held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009,
Concerned that official authorities sometimes tolerate or encourage acts of
violence, or credible threats of violence, against persons belonging to religious
communities and religious minorities,
Concerned also at the increasing number of laws and regulations that limit the
freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, and at the implementation of
existing laws in a discriminatory manner,
__________________
1 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
2 Resolution 217 A (III).
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and
corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.A/67/457/Add.2
143 12-63624
Convinced of the need to address the rise in various parts of the world of
religious extremism that affects the rights of individuals, the situations of violence
and discrimination that affect many women and other individuals on the basis or in
the name of religion or belief or in accordance with cultural and traditional practices
and the misuse of religion or belief for ends inconsistent with the principles set out
in the Charter of the United Nations and in other relevant instruments of the United
Nations,
Seriously concerned about all attacks on religious places, sites and shrines in
violation of international law, in particular human rights and humanitarian law,
including any deliberate destruction of relics and monuments,
Emphasizing that States, regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important role to play in
promoting tolerance and respect for religious and cultural diversity and in the
universal promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of religion
or belief,
Underlining the importance of education in the promotion of tolerance, which
involves the acceptance by the public of, and its respect for, diversity, including
with regard to religious expression, and underlining also the fact that education, in
particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful way to promoting tolerance
and the elimination of discrimination based on religion or belief,
1. Strongly condemns all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based
on religion or belief, as well as violations of freedom of thought, conscience and
religion or belief;
2. Stresses that the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or
belief applies equally to all persons, regardless of their religion or belief and
without any discrimination as to their equal protection by the law;
3. Emphasizes that, as underlined by the Human Rights Committee,
restrictions on the freedom to manifest one’s religion or belief are permitted only if
limitations are prescribed by law, are necessary to protect public safety, order, health
or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others, are non-discriminatory
and are applied in a manner that does not vitiate the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion or belief;
4. Also emphasizes that freedom of religion or belief and freedom of
expression are interdependent, interrelated and mutually reinforcing, and stresses
further the role that these rights can play in the fight against all forms of intolerance
and of discrimination based on religion or belief;
5. Recognizes with deep concern the overall rise in instances of intolerance
and violence, regardless of the actors, directed against members of many religious
and other communities in various parts of the world, including cases motivated by
Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and Christianophobia and prejudices against persons of
other religions or beliefs;
6. Strongly condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use of
print, audiovisual or electronic media or any other means;A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 144
7. Expresses concern at the persistence of institutionalized social
intolerance and discrimination practised against many on the grounds of religion or
belief, and emphasizes that legal procedures pertaining to religious or belief-based
groups and places of worship are not a prerequisite for the exercise of the right to
manifest one’s religion or belief and that such procedures, when legally required at
the national or local level, should be non-discriminatory in order to contribute to the
effective protection of the right of all persons to practise their religion or belief,
either individually or in community with others and in public or private;
8. Recognizes with concern the situation of persons in vulnerable situations,
including persons deprived of their liberty, refugees, asylum seekers and internally
displaced persons, children, persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities and migrants, as regards their ability to freely exercise their
right to freedom of religion or belief;
9. Emphasizes that States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to
prevent, investigate and punish acts of violence against persons belonging to
religious minorities, regardless of the perpetrator, and that failure to do so may
constitute a human rights violation;
10. Also emphasizes that no religion should be equated with terrorism, as this
may have adverse consequences on the enjoyment of the right to freedom of religion
or belief of all members of the religious communities concerned;
11. Deplores the continued existence of instances of religious intolerance, as
well as emerging obstacles to the enjoyment of the right to freedom of religion or
belief, inter alia:
(a) Instances of intolerance and violence directed against members of many
religious minorities and other communities in various parts of the world;
(b) Incidents of religious hatred, discrimination, intolerance and violence,
which may be manifested by the derogatory stereotyping, negative profiling and
stigmatization of persons based on their religion or belief;
(c) Attacks on or destruction of religious places, sites and shrines in
violation of international law, in particular human rights and humanitarian law, as
they have more than material significance for the dignity and lives of members of
communities holding spiritual or religious beliefs;
(d) Instances, both in law and practice, that constitute violations of the
fundamental right to freedom of religion or belief, including of the individual right
to publicly express one’s spiritual and religious beliefs, taking into account the
relevant articles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,1
as well
as other international instruments;
(e) Constitutional and legislative systems that fail to provide adequate and
effective guarantees of freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief to all
without distinction;
12. Urges States to step up their efforts to protect and promote freedom of
thought, conscience and religion or belief, and to this end:
(a) To ensure that their constitutional and legislative systems provide
adequate and effective guarantees of freedom of thought, conscience and religion or
belief to all without distinction, inter alia, by providing access to justice andA/67/457/Add.2
145 12-63624
effective remedies in cases where the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion or belief or the right to freely practise one’s religion, including the right to
change one’s religion or belief, is violated;
(b) To ensure that existing legislation is not implemented in a discriminatory
manner or does not result in discrimination based on religion or belief, that no one
within their jurisdiction is deprived of the right to life, liberty and security of person
because of religion or belief and that no one is subjected to torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, or arbitrary arrest or detention on
that account and to bring to justice all perpetrators of violations of these rights;
(c) To end violations of the human rights of women and to devote particular
attention to abolishing practices and legislation that discriminate against women,
including in the exercise of their right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion or belief;
(d) To ensure that no one is discriminated against on the basis of his or her
religion or belief when accessing, inter alia, education, medical care, employment,
humanitarian assistance or social benefits and to ensure that everyone has the right
and the opportunity to have access, on general terms of equality, to public services
in their country, without any discrimination on the basis of religion or belief;
(e) To review, whenever relevant, existing registration practices in order to
ensure that such practices do not limit the right of all persons to manifest their
religion or belief, either alone or in community with others and in public or private;
(f) To ensure that no official documents are withheld from the individual on
the grounds of religion or belief and that everyone has the right to refrain from
disclosing information concerning their religious affiliation in such documents
against their will;
(g) To ensure, in particular, the right of all persons to worship, assemble or
teach in connection with a religion or belief and their right to establish and maintain
places for these purposes, and the right of all persons to seek, receive and impart
information and ideas in these areas;
(h) To ensure that, in accordance with appropriate national legislation and in
conformity with international human rights law, the freedom of all persons and
members of groups to establish and maintain religious, charitable or humanitarian
institutions is fully respected and protected;
(i) To ensure that all public officials and civil servants, including members
of law enforcement bodies, and personnel of detention facilities, the military and
educators, in the course of fulfilling their official duties, respect freedom of religion
or belief and do not discriminate for reasons based on religion or belief, and that all
necessary and appropriate awareness-raising, education or training is provided;
(j) To take all necessary and appropriate action, in conformity with
international standards of human rights, to combat hatred, discrimination,
intolerance and acts of violence, intimidation and coercion motivated by intolerance
based on religion or belief, as well as incitement to hostility and violence, with
particular regard to members of religious minorities in all parts of the world;
(k) To promote, through education and other means, mutual understanding,
tolerance, non-discrimination and respect in all matters relating to freedom ofA/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 146
religion or belief by encouraging, in the society at large, a wider knowledge of
different religions and beliefs and of the history, traditions, languages and cultures
of the various religious minorities existing within their jurisdiction;
(l) To prevent any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on
religion or belief that impairs the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human
rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis and to detect signs of intolerance
that may lead to discrimination based on religion or belief;
13. Welcomes and encourages initiatives by the media to promote tolerance
and respect for religious and cultural diversity and the universal promotion and
protection of human rights, including freedom of religion or belief;
14. Stresses the importance of a continued and strengthened dialogue in all
its forms, including among and within religions or beliefs, and with broader
participation, including of women, to promote greater tolerance, respect and mutual
understanding, and welcomes different initiatives in this regard, including the
Alliance of Civilizations initiative and the programmes led by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
15. Welcomes and encourages the continuing efforts of all actors in society,
including non-governmental organizations and bodies and groups based on religion
or belief, to promote the implementation of the Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,4 and
further encourages their work in promoting freedom of religion or belief, in
highlighting cases of religious intolerance, discrimination and persecution and in
promoting religious tolerance;
16. Recommends that States, the United Nations and other actors, including
non-governmental organizations and bodies and groups based on religion or belief,
in their efforts to promote freedom of religion or belief, ensure the widest possible
dissemination of the text of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, in as many different
languages as possible, and promote its implementation;
17. Welcomes the work and the interim report of the Special Rapporteur of
the Human Rights Council on freedom of religion or belief;5
18. Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur, to
respond favourably to his requests to visit their countries and to provide all
information and follow-up necessary for the effective fulfilment of his mandate;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Special Rapporteur
receives the resources necessary to fully discharge his mandate;
20. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session;
21. Decides to consider the question of the elimination of all forms of
religious intolerance at its sixty-eighth session under the item entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights”.
__________________
4 See resolution 36/55.
5 See A/67/303.A/67/457/Add.2
147 12-63624
Draft resolution XX
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 61/177 of 20 December 2006, by which it adopted
and opened for signature, ratification and accession the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,
Recalling its resolution 47/133 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the
Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a body
of principles for all States,
Recalling also its resolution 66/160 of 19 December 2011, as well as relevant
resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council, including resolution 21/4 of
27 September 2012,1 in which the Council took note of the report of the Working
Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances 2 and the recommendations
contained therein,
Recalling further that no exceptional circumstance whatsoever may be invoked
as a justification for enforced disappearance,
Recalling that no one shall be held in secret detention,
Deeply concerned, in particular, by the increase in enforced or involuntary
disappearances in various regions of the world, including arrest, detention and
abduction, when these are part of or amount to enforced disappearances, and by the
growing number of reports concerning harassment, ill-treatment and intimidation of
witnesses of disappearances or relatives of persons who have disappeared,
Recalling that the Convention sets out the right of victims to know the truth
regarding the circumstances of the enforced disappearance, the progress and results
of the investigation and the fate of the disappeared person, and sets forth State party
obligations to take appropriate measures in this regard,
Acknowledging that acts of enforced disappearance are recognized in the
Convention as crimes against humanity, in certain circumstances,
Acknowledging also the valuable work of the International Committee of the
Red Cross in promoting compliance with international humanitarian law in this field,
1. Welcomes the entry into force of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance3 on 23 December 2010, and
recognizes that its implementation will be a significant contribution to ending
impunity and to promoting and protecting all human rights for all;
2. Also welcomes the fact that ninety-one States have signed the Convention
and thirty-six have ratified or acceded to it, and calls upon States that have not yet
done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention as a matter of
__________________
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
2 A/HRC/19/58/Rev.1.
3 Resolution 61/177, annex.A/67/457/Add.2
12-63624 148
priority, as well as to consider the option provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the
Convention regarding the Committee on Enforced Disappearances;
3. Further welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;4
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue their intensive efforts to assist States
in becoming parties to the Convention, with a view to achieving universal
adherence;
5. Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, to continue making efforts to disseminate
information on the Convention, to promote understanding of it and to assist States
parties in implementing their obligations under this instrument;
6. Welcomes the work achieved by the Committee on Enforced
Disappearances during its first three sessions, and encourages all States parties to
the Convention to support and promote the work of the Committee and to implement
its recommendations;
7. Recognizes the importance of the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a body of principles for all States designed
to punish enforced disappearances, to prevent their commission and to help victims
of such acts and their families to seek fair, prompt and adequate reparation;
8. Notes that 2012 marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption by the
General Assembly of the Declaration and urges all States to promote and to give full
effect to it;
9. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and the Committee on Enforced
Disappearances, within the framework of their respective mandates;
10. Takes note with interest of all the general comments of the Working
Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, including the most recent one on
the right to recognition as a person before the law in the context of enforced
disappearances,5 which are aimed at helping States to apply the Declaration in a
way that is most conducive to the protection of all persons from enforced
disappearances;
11. Invites the Chair of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances and the
Chair of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to address
and engage in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth
session under the item on the promotion and protection of human rights;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session a report on the status of the Convention and the implementation
of the present resolution.
__________________
4 A/67/271.
5 See A/HRC/19/58/Rev.1, sect. II.H.