United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.27
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
14 December 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-56535 (E)
*0756535*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 27th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 26 October 2007, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 62: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.27
07-56535 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 62: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued) (A/C.3/62/L.6)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.6: Cooperatives in social
development
1. Ms. Ochir (Mongolia), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of its sponsors, who had been
joined by Brazil, Guatemala, Honduras, Mali,
Myanmar and Panama, said that cooperatives provided
a means of creating decent employment in the private
sector, thereby supplementing the action of the public
authorities. Through financial services, particularly in
microfinance, they offered employment opportunities
to marginalized social groups, such as women, who
could create their own businesses and be integrated
into the economy. They also enabled local producers to
sell their products under fair trade conditions and to tap
into niche markets. By providing training, health care
and other social services, they had a positive impact on
employment and on individual production capacity. It
would therefore be very desirable for local, national
and international decision makers to promote the
establishment and development of cooperatives.
2. She pointed out that, following consultations, the
draft resolution had been amended to take into account
the recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
report on cooperatives in social development
(A/62/154). The following fourth preambular paragraph
had been added: “Noting with appreciation the potential
role of cooperatives development in the improvement
of social and economic conditions of the indigenous
peoples and rural communities”. In addition, the words
“and social” had been inserted between the words
“business” and “enterprises” in paragraphs 2 and 3, and
the phrase “, eradication of poverty” had been inserted
in paragraph 2 after the words “sustainable
development”. Paragraph 4 (b) had been modified to
read: “Encouraging and facilitating the establishment
and development of cooperatives, including taking
measures aimed at enabling people living in poverty or
belonging to vulnerable groups, including women,
youth, persons with disabilities, older persons and
indigenous peoples, to fully participate, on a voluntary
basis, in cooperatives, and to address their social
service needs”.
3. Similarly, in paragraph 4 (c), the words “to build
the capacity of cooperatives” had been replaced by
“and capacity-building of cooperatives”, and in
paragraph 4 (d), the words “and eradication of poverty”
had been added after “to employment generation and to
socio-economic development”. Lastly, paragraph 4 (e)
had been deleted, as had the words “through the
Economic and Social Council” at the end of
paragraph 8. She hoped that the draft resolution would
be adopted by consensus.
4. Mr. Gustafik (Deputy Secretary of the
Committee) said that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Dominican Republic and Malawi had
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/62/36, A/62/369 and A/62/464)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/62/183, A/62/207,
A/62/212, A/62/214, A/62/218, A/62/222,
A/62/225, A/62/227, A/62/254, A/62/255,
A/62/265, A/62/280, A/62/286, A/62/287,
A/62/288, A/62/289, A/62/293, A/62/298,
A/62/304, A/62/317 and A/C.3/62/3)
(c) Human rights situation and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/62/213, A/62/223, A/62/263, A/62/264,
A/62/275, A/62/313, A/62/318, A/62/354 and
A/62/498)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (continued) (A/62/230)
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (A/62/318)
5. Mr. Muntarbhorn (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea), introducing his report (A/62/264),
recalled that the authorities of the country had so far
declined to cooperate with him under the mandate
entrusted to him by the Commission on Human Rights
in 2004.A/C.3/62/SR.27
3 07-56535
6. On the constructive side, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea was a party to four human rights
treaties — the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention
for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. It continued to cooperate with a number of
United Nations agencies in the country and had
undertaken some key law reforms, including revision
of its Criminal and Criminal Procedure Codes in 2004
and 2005. A further cause of satisfaction was the
conclusion, in October 2007, in the context of the six-
party talks, of the Agreement on Second-Phase Actions
for the Implementation of the Joint Statement. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had thereby
agreed to declare all its nuclear programmes and to
disable nuclear facilities in Yongbyon by the end of the
year and, in return, would receive external
humanitarian assistance that could help to improve the
human rights situation through bilateral talks under the
six-party umbrella. The holding of the October 2007
summit between the two Koreas was also a welcome
development.
7. Yet the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea remained grave. The
country had been suffering from a severe food shortage
since the 1990s, caused by natural disasters and
mismanagement by the authorities, aggravated by the
overemphasis on militarization and failure to generate
food security due to unsustainable agricultural
development. In 2006, the World Food Programme had
begun its Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation to
bring food aid to 1.9 million people, principally
women and young children, which had, however, been
slowed down by the missile and nuclear tests carried
out by the country. The Government must ensure food
security by itself addressing the chronic food shortage,
without relying in the long term on the international
emergency relief provided by United Nations agencies.
8. It had been reported that the authorities were
continuing to persecute, torture or execute political
dissidents and that prison conditions, in detention
centres both for political dissidents and for criminals,
as well as in re-education and forced labour camps,
remained sub-standard. Furthermore, since the country
was closed and information flow and the media were
under rigid State control, there was no freedom of
expression, information or association. Religious
freedom was officially allowed, but was not a reality. It
was also to be recalled that, since the 1970s, a number
of Japanese nationals had been abducted by agents of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, probably
with the aim of using them to train spies or of usurping
their identity for espionage purposes. Only five of them
had returned to Japan, while the fate of the others
remained uncertain, owing in particular to inadequate
cooperation and follow-up on the part of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
9. Concerning the issue of refugees and the right to
asylum, he stressed that the movements of refugees
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had
led to a boom in the trafficking in human beings and
the exploitation of refugees. Moreover, practices
towards refugees by first asylum countries varied:
some States forcibly returned them to their countries of
origin while others offered temporary refuge. In that
regard, it was incumbent upon the international
community to settle refugee problems and to exert
effective influence on countries of origin to address the
root causes leading to refugee outflows. The
international community should also help first asylum
countries to find durable solutions to the refugee
problem. The destinations chosen by refugees was a
function of the differences in the treatment mentioned
above: when one country took a stringent approach
towards those seeking refuge, refugees tended to seek
access to other countries with a more lenient approach.
10. His previous reports dealt with the vulnerability
of various groups, such as persons with disabilities,
and women and children who were not part of the elite
in the country of origin, and therefore bore the brunt of
discrimination.
11. He stressed the importance of the responsibility
of the State authorities for egregious human rights
violations. The scenario had been made even more
volatile by the various missile and nuclear tests, as
previously mentioned, which led the Security Council
to impose sanctions against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. He further noted that in the
preamble to resolution 1718 (2006), the Security
Council made implicit reference to the issue of human
rights by its emphasis on “other security and
humanitarian concerns of the international community”.
12. He invited the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea: (1) To abide by its international obligations
under the various human rights treaties to which it wasA/C.3/62/SR.27
07-56535 4
a party, as well as international law, and shift military
expenditure to the human development sector and
reallocate national resources to protect human rights
and promote human security; (2) To facilitate access to
humanitarian aid, respect the need for monitoring and
build food security for the population; (3) To reform its
prison system and build the judiciary in order to
establish greater respect for fundamental freedoms,
eliminate violence against the human person, and
cooperate with the resolution of cases of abduction and
disappearance; (4) To respect the freedom of
movement of its citizens and to amend its legislation
accordingly; (5) To allow the Special Rapporteur to
enter the country to assess the human rights situation
and advise on needed improvements.
13. He also invited the international community to
establish dialogue with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea with relevant incentives, graduated
influence and economic and security guarantees, and to
mobilize all United Nations bodies to promote and
protect human rights throughout the country.
14. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that his delegation objected to the
resolution establishing the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur, which had been adopted under pressure
from the United States and the European Union, and
was based on lies that supported hostility towards his
Government. The issue of human rights concerned not
only the promotion and protection of the rights and
freedoms of persons, but also the protection of the
dignity and sovereignty of States. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would continue to defend
socialism and its freedom.
15. In addressing the role of the international
community, he believed that attempting to disgrace a
country was not a very constructive way of dealing
with the issue of human rights. His Government had
formerly cooperated with the international community
in the area of human rights, for example, by
authorizing representatives of the European Union and
Amnesty International to visit prisons and to meet
members of the judiciary, and by its consideration of
adherence to various international instruments such as
the Convention against Torture. However, those efforts
had ended since the adoption of resolutions against his
country.
16. Ms. Tavares (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, urged the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur, including by granting him access to the
country. She asked the Special Rapporteur how, in his
opinion, he expected the human rights situation to
improve, given the progress made in the six-party talks
and whether he believed that such progress might
include future cooperation with his mandate. She also
asked whether the treatment of refugees in third
countries, or by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea itself in the case of persons who were forcibly
returned, might be improved, and what role the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
might play in that regard.
17. Similarly, she asked what role technical
assistance provided by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights could play in
preventing torture and in reforming the prison system
in order to promote greater respect for fundamental
freedoms in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. She asked which other groups were regarded as
particularly vulnerable and what particular measures
had been envisaged for their protection.
18. Mr. Reese (United States of America), noting the
lack of cooperation of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea authorities with the Special Rapporteur,
welcomed the progress achieved in the first half of
2007 within the framework of the six-party talks. He
sought further clarification on the variety of detention
centres in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and on the definition of political dissidents as used in
the report of the Special Rapporteur. In addition, it
would be useful if the Special Rapporteur could
provide an estimate of the ratio of political dissidents
to ordinary prisoners in those centres and share his
views on how to prevent and combat the exploitation
of refugees from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea by smugglers and other intermediaries.
19. United States officials had repeatedly stated that
improvements in the human rights record of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would be
necessary for that country to join the international
community and normalize relations with the United
States. His Government would continue to explore and
identify firm measures for addressing those problems,
including through international organizations and
bilateral partnerships.
20. Mr. Oshima (Japan) welcomed the objectivity of
the work of the Special Rapporteur and said that hisA/C.3/62/SR.27
5 07-56535
delegation fully endorsed his recommendations,
particularly those that invited the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to honour its obligations with
respect to the various international human rights
instruments and to address the root causes of refugee
outflows. In addition, the country should open its
borders to the Special Rapporteur, for whom Japan
wished to reaffirm its support. He recalled that
abductions and enforced disappearances were flagrant
violations of human rights. Only 5 of the 17 cases of
abduction and enforced disappearances officially
recognized by Japan had been resolved. He therefore
appealed to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to adopt the necessary measures for the 12 remaining
cases to be resolved. In conclusion, he asked the
Special Rapporteur to clarify what firm measures the
international community and the United Nations could
adopt in order to promote and protect human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and what
progress had been achieved in the human rights
situation since the latest round of six-party talks.
21. Ms. Stuewer (Canada), regretting that the Special
Rapporteur had still not been given access to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, urged the
Government to change its position and to also allow
the Special Rapporteur on the freedom of religion or
belief, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression and the Special Rapporteur on the right to
food to visit the country. She encouraged the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to address the
root causes of the flight of refugees and to put an end
to the persecution of those who were returned by
receiving States. She further asked the Special
Rapporteur to indicate how the international
community could contribute to the improvement of the
human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
22. Ms. Park Enna (Republic of Korea) said that she
agreed with the Special Rapporteur that the signing of
the Agreement on Second-Phase Actions for the
Implementation of the September 2005 Joint Statement
would have a beneficial influence on the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. She also concurred with him that the inter-
Korean summit meeting would have a positive impact
on that situation and would enhance the chances for
peace and prosperity in the peninsula and throughout
the region.
23. With regard to food security in the country, she
said that the ongoing food shortage was a pressing
problem necessitating the continued supply of
humanitarian aid. She asked the Special Rapporteur to
clarify the definition of “refugees sur place” and the
rationale behind the principle of non-refoulement and
to explain what kind of cooperation could reasonably
be contemplated with a view to assisting refugees. She
also requested him to outline what measures of
cooperation between the international community and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea were most
needed and easiest to apply in order to improve the
quality of life of the country’s population.
24. Mr. Muntarbhorn (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea), replying first to the questions put
by the representative of Portugal, said that United
Nations assistance with flood relief measures was a
good example of cooperation with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and that the six-party talks
offered a variety of opportunities to improve the human
rights situation in the country, especially through
bilateral channels. The number of refugees had risen in
South-East Asia, perhaps partly because of the attitude
of host countries. In that connection, he called on the
countries concerned to grant the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
access to all refugees, wherever they were. As for the
rule of law and prison conditions, he invited the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to accept the
offer of technical assistance from the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR). Lastly, discrimination against women and
children who did not belong to the elite was causing
many people who were bereft of means of sustenance
to leave the country.
25. In response to the questions raised by the
representative of the United States, he said that many
people were being held in detention and major prison
reforms were necessary. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea did have laws to combat people
smuggling, but they were implemented only in part.
The issue was closely related to criminal elements
operating in the border area. It would therefore be wise
for neighbouring countries to ratify the Protocol to
prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.A/C.3/62/SR.27
07-56535 6
26. With regard to the question of the representative
of Japan concerning the advisability of using the
totality of the United Nations system to solve human
rights problems in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, he said that United Nations entities should
mainstream human rights into their work and were
about to adopt measures on key issues in that respect.
The six-party talks were indicative of a more
auspicious period, since they opened up further
possibilities for multilateral and bilateral collaboration
and cooperation. As far as the matter of abductions was
concerned, in 2002, Japan and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea had signed the Pyongyang
Declaration in which they undertook to settle their
disputes amicably and to take steps to normalize their
relations once the outstanding issues had been settled.
27. As for policy options for the future, the concern
of the representative of Canada, he said that they
remained those currently on offer, namely multilateral
cooperation, six-party talks and bilateral relations.
28. Turning to the questions and comments of the
representative of the Republic of Korea, he welcomed
the convening of the inter-Korean summit meeting and,
in particular, the joint Declaration. The food situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should
be solved not only by means of food aid, but also
through food security measures to prevent the partial
loss of crops before and after the harvest and to
conserve the environment through good watershed and
land management, with due participation of the
population in the planning of agricultural activities.
29. Refugees were deemed to be people who had fled
from their country of origin for fear of persecution.
Persons who left their home country because they were
hungry were not considered to be refugees within the
meaning of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees or the 1966 Protocol thereto, but they
could be regarded as such if they feared persecution on
returning to their country. That was precisely the
situation of hunger refugees from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, who left without a visa
and who were likely to be punished on going back.
With regard to regional cooperation, he had already
voiced his sympathy with first-asylum countries, which
were often neighbouring countries whose concerns
about the massive influx of refugees were
understandable. At the international level, it was
therefore vital to establish a climate of trust and to help
those countries to assist refugees, to provide them with
temporary protection and, possibly, to resettle them. As
for the quality of life in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, the challenge was to address
freedom from want and fear. His report contained
various recommendations to that end. He therefore
urged representatives to examine them in depth and to
support any ensuing programmes implemented with the
cooperation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Report of the Independent expert on the situation of
human rights in Burundi: Presentation and dialogue
(A/62/213)
30. Mr. Okola (Independent expert on the situation
of human rights in Burundi), introducing his interim
report (A/62/213), said that during his mission, he had
focused on one important issue: solidarity with the
people of Burundi in pursuit of their economic and
social rights. To that end, he had timed his visit to
coincide with the round-table donors conference on the
Government’s implementation of the Poverty
Reduction Strategy. He had wanted to be present on
that occasion so that he could lobby donors to provide
the people of Burundi with the assistance they needed
in order to benefit from the dividends of peace. He had
also wanted to register his conviction that while civil
and political rights were important, they should not be
emphasized at the expense of economic and social
rights. Donors had pledged US$ 650 million to Burundi
at the round table.
31. Tensions within the ruling party, the Conseil
national de défense de la démocratie-Force de défense
de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD), had escalated in early
2007 because of the party leadership’s involvement in
the management of Government affairs. That situation
had had a negative impact on the human rights
situation and had polarized Burundian society to a
degree that could have threatened the peace process
and the stability of national institutions. Later, during
his visit, concerns had been raised regarding the
general tendency towards corruption, and at times
scandals had implicated high-ranking officials of the
Government and the ruling party. The Government had
set up an anti-corruption court, but further action was
needed.
32. Despite the persistence of serious violations, the
overall human rights situation seemed to have
improved. Relations between the State and civil society
were quite a bit better and the media were able toA/C.3/62/SR.27
7 07-56535
report on a wide range of matters without Government
interference. There were few cases of human rights
violations by military personnel; most of those
registered concerned ill-treatment, and sometimes
torture, of suspects by the police and violations of legal
procedure by the police and the judiciary.
33. Arbitrary arrests had increased during the
reporting period and had included cases of prolonged
stay in police custody, detention in illegal places and
lengthy pre-trial detention.
34. In his previous report, he had drawn attention to
the massacre of over 30 civil detainees by military
authorities in the province of Muyinga. The
Government had established four commissions to
investigate the matter but, to date, none of the reports
compiled by those bodies had been made public; that
suggested that the Government was not interested in
disclosing their contents and wanted to shield the high-
ranking public figures that they implicated. It was
therefore incumbent on the people of Burundi and the
international community to bring pressure to bear on
the Government so that all those involved in the
massacre would be brought to justice and the culture of
impunity that was so deeply ingrained in the politics of
Burundi would be eradicated.
35. With respect to sexual violence, over 300 cases of
rape had been reported during the first five months of
2007. Despite the awareness campaigns organized by
the Government, some of the victims remained silent
and some of the administrative authorities and
community elders continued to recommend out-of-
court settlements.
36. The situation of food security had worsened
during the first five months of 2007 as a result of
heavy rains that had destroyed crops and houses in
many parts of the country, which clearly required
international humanitarian assistance until it recovered
from cyclical famine.
37. Implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement
between the Government, the Forces nationales pour la
libération (FNL-Palipehutu) and its armed wing had
not yet been implemented at the time of his visit. The
Government and the FNL were deadlocked on the
issues of power-sharing and demobilization; that
situation, in turn, had had an impact on security in the
country. During the past month, the FNL had allegedly
killed 33 people in Bujumbura Rural, a fact that
underscored the urgent need to implement the
Ceasefire Agreement.
38. During his visit, he had drawn the authorities’
attention to the issue of delays in implementation of
the planned transitional justice mechanisms. They had
informed him that the Government and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights had reached consensus
on national consultations and that the President of
Burundi had confirmed to the High Commissioner that
there would be no amnesty for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and crimes of genocide committed
during the conflict. However, the question of the
relationship between the truth and reconciliation
commission and the special tribunal had yet to be
resolved; the Government’s position was that the
special tribunal’s investigations should be based on
referrals from the commission, while the United Nations
was of the view that the tribunal should be independent
of the commission in conducting its investigations.
39. For several reasons (lack of equipment, poor
training, interference by politicians and corruption),
the justice system in Burundi was still weak.
Consequently, the population had lost faith in that
system and was resorting to mob justice. Furthermore,
the Government had made little progress in bringing to
justice civilians and law enforcement officials who
were involved in illegal activities; for example, the
alleged perpetrators of the Muyinga massacre had yet
to be arrested or charged.
40. In conclusion, he appealed to the Government to
speed up the establishment of the truth and
reconciliation commission and the special tribunal and
called on the international community to support
efforts to reform the justice system and provide
humanitarian and development assistance. He urged the
Government to release the reports on its investigation
into the Muyinga massacre and bring all those involved
to justice, and the Burundian authorities to investigate
cases of sexual violence and bring those responsible to
justice. He also urged the Government and the
FLN-Palipehutu to implement the Ceasefire Agreement.
Lastly, he encouraged donors to release the funds
pledged at the Paris, Geneva and Brussels conferences
and called on the international community to support
the reform of the justice system and, in particular, the
establishment of transitional justice mechanisms such
as the truth and reconciliation commission and the
special tribunal.A/C.3/62/SR.27
07-56535 8
41. Mr. Ntakirutimana (Burundi) said that if the
Peacebuilding Commission was focusing on Burundi, it
was because his country needed special attention. After
gaining independence, it had faced several difficult
years of conflict, during which human rights had been
openly flouted. The current leaders, who were still
young, were survivors of that dark period in the
nation’s history. The Government realized that despite
the considerable achievements of the past two years,
much remained to be done in the field of human rights.
It was determined to take action to improve that
situation, including by combating corruption, but it
needed help in order to make economic progress,
create jobs and feed its people, who were hungry.
42. Ms. Tavares (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that in light of past
experience, she viewed the role of transitional justice
arrangements as crucial to future stability and
reconciliation. She therefore requested further
information on the mandate of the steering committee
and on the implications of its work for the truth and
reconciliation commission and the special tribunal. She
also asked what the timetable for the steering
committee’s work was and what would happen once it
had completed that work. She wondered how the
international community could encourage the
Government to take action in order to ensure that
justice was done in the cases of the massacres in
Gatumba and Muyinga.
43. While she welcomed the Government’s efforts to
improve the administration of justice in the country
and the work of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Burundi (BINUB)/United Nations country team, there
were serious problems with Burundi’s justice system
(including lack of due process, arbitrary detentions,
mistreatment of detainees, corruption and political
influence). She asked the Independent Expert how far
the review of the Code of Criminal Procedure had
proceeded thus far and what action the international
community should take to support further reform of the
justice system. In light of the increased levels of sexual
violence and the impunity enjoyed by those
responsible, she also wondered whether the existing
laws were adequate to deal with cases of sexual
violence and whether further amendments were
needed. She asked what other measures had been taken
to prevent and put an end to such violence and how the
problem of unwillingness to name the perpetrators
could be addressed.
44. Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) said that the
situation in Burundi could not be properly understood
without taking into account all that had been achieved
by the Burundian authorities. Fundamental rights were
not limited to civil and political rights but also
included the right to decent housing, food, work and
health. He again proposed that independent experts
should stay longer and more often in the countries
concerned so as to be able to form a good idea of the
situation and report usefully on it to the General
Assembly. It was also necessary to help the Burundian
authorities to stabilize the country, build peace,
promote reconciliation and improve living conditions,
particularly in terms of jobs, health and housing. He
hoped that the independent expert would collaborate
with the Peacebuilding Commission, which had done
excellent work for Burundi.
45. Ms. Mwaipopo (United Republic of Tanzania)
asked the independent expert about the past and future
role of regional entities, such as the African Union and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, in the peace process in Burundi.
46. Mr. Hagen (United States of America) stressed
the importance of collecting data on human rights
violations when seeking to identify their perpetrators
and reform institutions. He asked the independent
expert to explain the assertion in paragraph 19 of the
report that few human rights violations had been
committed by military personnel, since it was stated in
paragraphs 22 and 35 that military forces had been
involved in killings and the use of forced labour, while
the United States report on human rights in Burundi
spoke of a number of acts of violence committed by the
army.
47. Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon), endorsing the
remarks and the proposal made by the representative of
Guinea-Bissau, said that the representative of Burundi
had clearly described the situation in his country and
what the international community must do to help it.
Burundi had come a long way, and the current
generation, made up of survivors from a period when
everyone’s rights had constantly been flouted, was
endeavouring to promote fundamental rights. The
international community should therefore examine the
situation without any bias and, at the same time,
increase its assistance to the country, which was
essential for it not only to rebuild but also to restore
civil peace.A/C.3/62/SR.27
9 07-56535
48. Mr. Okola (Independent expert on the situation
in Burundi) agreed that the situation in Burundi should
be studied in the light of how far the country had come
in the space of a few years. In 2005, against all
expectations, Burundi had managed to hold elections,
form a government and meet the obligations set out in
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. The
ethnic composition of the country and the importance
of the role of women in society had been duly taken
into account when the Government and institutions had
been put in place. Several issues that had given cause
for much concern two years earlier, like the integration
of the army and the police force, political prisoners,
demobilization and the recruitment of child soldiers, no
longer required attention. Burundi had made huge
progress in a short period and was now enjoying
relative peace, thanks to the efforts made by its
Government.
49. The Government was indeed determined to
improve the situation, as was demonstrated by the
continuing training of military personnel and members
of the public security services and action to develop
awareness of human rights, conducted in collaboration
with the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi.
In response to the question put by the representative of
the United States, he said that over the past two years,
there had been a drop in the number of human rights
violations and that, far from minimizing the problems
relating to the conduct of the military forces, police
and other organs of the State, he had wished to show
that they were committing fewer acts of violence than
previously.
50. Going on to address the questions raised by the
representative of Portugal concerning the steering
committee, he said that it had not yet been set up and
hence did not for the time being have a mandate or a
timetable. It would be mainly required to work for the
reconciliation of Burundian society, but it was still not
known whether it would continue to exist once the
truth and reconciliation commission had been put in
place. As for the investigations into the Muyinga and
Gatumba massacres, there was no progress to report. It
was however crucial that the Government of Burundi
and the international community shed every possible
light on those events.
51. With regard to the judicial system, the Penal
Code was still being reviewed. As for the reform of the
law on sexual offences, the President of Burundi had
stated that the perpetrators would not benefit from any
clemency.
52. He agreed with the representative of Guinea-
Bissau that civil and political rights must not take
precedence over other rights and that access to food
and housing was just as important as political freedom.
As for the international community’s pledges of
support for reconstruction, they were welcome, but
they now had to be translated into reality.
53. The Chairman, speaking in his capacity as
representative of Jamaica and member of the
Peacebuilding Commission, commended the
Government of Burundi for all its efforts to bolster
peace and democracy and joined previous speakers in
stressing that all fundamental rights should be given
equal importance.
Report of the independent expert on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (A/62/313)
54. Mr. Pacéré (Independent expert on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo), introducing his report (A/62/313), said that,
notwithstanding the determination of the President
elected in 2006 and the new Government to ensure
respect for human rights and combat impunity, serious
human rights violations continued to be perpetrated
throughout the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, especially by members of the armed forces
and the police, and to remain unpunished. Such had
been the situation noted by the Special Rapporteurs on
the independence of judges and lawyers and on
violence against women during their official visits to
the country, in April and July 2007 respectively. There
had been outbursts of violence in Bas-Congo and
Kinshasa in the wake of the elections, accompanied by
wholesale violations of human rights, whose
perpetrators had still not been brought to justice.
55. In 2007, the situation had also deteriorated in the
eastern part of the country. In North Kivu, the Bravo
mixed brigade had massacred at least 15 persons in
Buramba. Following the “mixage” process launched by
the Government at the beginning of the year, a large
number of officers loyal to the renegade general
Laurent Nkunda, who were responsible for serious
human rights violations, had been simply reincorporated
into the army. As a result, there had been armed
confrontations between the Forces démocratiques deA/C.3/62/SR.27
07-56535 10
libération du Rwanda and the mixed brigades loyal to
General Nkunda, which had exacerbated ethnic tension,
created greater insecurity, triggered mass displacements
of the population and led to an increase in the number
of ethnically or politically motivated human rights
violations. The situation was especially serious in that
both sides were targeting the civilian population and
were largely preventing humanitarian organizations
from going into the most affected areas. Much of South
Kivu was under the control of armed groups of
Rwandan Hutu, who attacked civilians. In May, some
40 persons, mainly women and children, had been
reported to have been wounded or hacked to death and
at least seven women had been abducted by members
of the Kanyola militia, in retaliation against the armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
56. Sexual violence continued to be widespread, most
notably in North Kivu and South Kivu and in Equateur
province. Very few of the presumed offenders had been
brought to justice. According to statistics compiled by
the integrated United Nations Human Rights Office in
South Kivu, between 2005 and 2007, 287 cases of rape
had been referred to the civilian and military courts,
while in 2005, the health services had recorded around
14,200 new cases of sexual violence, which meant that
less than 1 per cent of cases had been brought to
justice. In 43 cases, 80 per cent of the persons charged
had been released on remand and had never again
appeared before a court, and more than 80 per cent of
cases had been pending for two years. In most of the
cases, the victims were poor women unable to pay the
legal costs demanded before enforcement of judgement.
57. The prison situation was precarious and of
serious concern, because of overcrowding, poor
sanitary conditions, lack of food and inadequate
medical care. There was also an urgent need to address
the increasing number of cases of pre-trial detention.
58. Impunity, which was largely a result of
interference by political and military actors in the
administration of justice, remained a major source of
concern. Most serious human rights violations had not
been prosecuted or even investigated. None of the
serious crimes committed during the wars of 1996 and
2002 had been thoroughly investigated and many
suspected war criminals continued to be appointed and
promoted within the national army. The judicial system
had limited resources and there were far too few judges
and courts. During her visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in May 2007, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights had spoken about
human rights violations and impunity with President
Kabila and other officials. She had recalled that under
no circumstances should the Democratic Republic of
the Congo grant amnesties to those who committed
serious violations of fundamental rights and had
requested the establishment of competitive recruitment
for members of the defence and security forces so that
those who perpetrated atrocities could not join their
ranks. She had also obtained support from the
Government for a credible and unprecedented map to
be drawn up of the most serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law committed
between 1993 and 2003 and for an evaluation of the
capacities of the Congolese judicial system, which
would provide assistance in the development of a
transitional justice strategy and in the establishment of
appropriate mechanisms.
59. The independent expert recommended that the
authorities should show zero tolerance for the
perpetrators of human rights violations; put an end to
political and military interference in the administration
of justice; provide the judicial system with the
resources and the budget required to guarantee its
effectiveness and its independence; ensure that no
amnesties were granted to those who committed war
crimes, crimes against humanity and acts of genocide;
adopt the law implementing the Rome Statute; duly
support the team responsible for drawing up the map of
human rights violations; initiate a process for the
competitive recruitment of members of the defence and
security forces; and establish a national human rights
commission which conformed to international
standards. The authorities would also need to take
urgent measures to address the deterioration of the
situation in the east of the country. In North Kivu, the
integrated brigades should go through the system of
brassage and serious incidents should give rise to
judicial proceedings. In South Kivu, it was crucial to
expedite the disarmament of armed groups of Rwandan
Hutus and to punish those who committed serious
crimes against civilians. It was also essential for
independent and impartial investigations to be carried
out into the incidents in Bas-Congo and Kinshasa, and
for the persons involved in them to be tried. To that
end, the security services must be punished when they
committed serious human rights violations and their
mandate must be brought into line with international
standards. Finally, it was necessary to establish a
special international tribunal or, failing that, jointA/C.3/62/SR.27
11 07-56535
criminal chambers, to prosecute the crimes committed
before 1 July 2002 and those committed since that
date.
60. Mr. Mukongo Ngay (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) said that the report of the independent expert
had been prepared in the same way as the report of the
previous year. However, the present report limited
itself to setting out the facts without placing them in
the current socio-political and economic context. The
independent expert had also failed to mention the
rebirth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a
State based on law and its return to international affairs
as a credible actor and partner. Indeed, after long years
of crisis, the Democratic Republic of the Congo had
managed to hold free and democratic elections, to
pacify and reunify the territory, to establish legitimate
institutions and to restore growth. It was prioritizing
reconstruction and development view the aim of rolling
back poverty, injustice and social inequalities. It was in
that context that his country was attached to promoting
the rule of law, which it badly needed to eradicate such
scourges as the sexual exploitation of women and
children, to cite but one example. It should be noted,
however, that no State on its own could address the
many challenges that the restoration of a justice system
and compliance with the rule of law entailed in a post-
conflict society. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo was therefore committed to international
justice, particularly the International Criminal Court.
Nevertheless, the belief of the Congolese Government
in international justice had not made it lose sight of the
virtues of national justice, which alone was capable of
tackling problems that had emerged during the war,
including the use of rape as a weapon of war, organized
crime, money-laundering, illicit trafficking in weapons
and the illegal exploitation of natural resources and
other forms of wealth.
61. In that respect, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was aware of the dilapidated state to which its
judicial and prison systems had been reduced and it
needed immediate and practical assistance in order to
remedy that situation. It was on the basis of that
imperative that his country would in future review the
relevance both of the independent expert’s mandate
and of the resolutions on the human rights situation on
its territory. Owing to the existence of the Human
Rights Council, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would support the revision, even the withdrawal, of the
independent expert’s mandate and the establishment of
a universal periodic review. However, in the meantime
it would support the independent expert’s
recommendations, including those concerning the
establishment of a special international criminal
tribunal or joint criminal chambers, and it hoped that
those recommendations would be followed by action.
62. Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda) said that while the
independent expert’s report properly reflected the
tragedy of the civilian population in certain areas of
North and South Kivu, it ought to have been more
in-depth and more coherent. It would have been
particularly desirable for the report to dwell on the root
causes of the situation in those areas of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, especially the presence and
total freedom to act with impunity of the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and
the Interahamwe militias. The report should also have
made recommendations concerning those entities, if
only to reflect paragraphs 23, 26, 34 and 51 to 58 of
the report, which described some of the crimes and
atrocities committed by FDLR and the militias in
question.
63. Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) said that he
regretted the purely descriptive nature of the report,
which should have been more analytical. The report
revealed inculpatory material against the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo but failed to
present exculpatory material. In particular with regard
to the conditions of detention in prisons, the
independent expert’s report made no reference to the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), which
had a considerable budget and a large number of staff.
He therefore wished to know whether the independent
expert had been given an opportunity to work with
MONUC and to propose solutions to it regarding
conditions of detention.
64. Ms. Stuewer (Canada) recalled that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo had recently
ratified the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, which
included protocols on mutual legal assistance and on
the prevention and suppression of sexual violence
against women and children. She asked the
independent expert whether he believed that regional
and international support provided to implement the
Pact and its protocols could improve the human rights
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and,
if so, in what way.A/C.3/62/SR.27
07-56535 12
65. Mr. Hagen (United States of America) said that
he shared the independent expert’s concerns regarding
the state of human rights in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. He welcomed the fact that the Congolese
Government had recognized the problems that it faced
in that area, as demonstrated by its cooperation with
the independent expert. However, it was clear that
much more proactive measures must be taken to put an
end to the killings, forced disappearances, acts of
torture and arbitrary arrests and detentions. While the
report was highly useful in its recommendations and in
many other respects, it would have benefited from a
closer examination of problems related to labour rights
violations, particularly various types of forced labour,
trafficking in persons and the recruitment of child
soldiers. With regard to the latter, although the report
briefly mentioned the need for the Congolese
Government to combat the use of children by
Government forces, armed groups and militia, it might
also have reported more substantively on the unlawful
recruitment of child soldiers, including children from
Rwandan refugee camps.
66. Ms. Tavares (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, expressed the European Union’s
increasing concern at the persistence of violence in
North Kivu province and sought the independent
expert’s views on the violence and its impact on the
human rights and humanitarian situation in the
province.
67. She wondered whether he had learned of any
further developments concerning the widespread sexual
violence in the conflict-affected eastern and other areas
of the country since the submission of his report,
including with respect to any measures taken by the
Government to combat impunity. She asked to what
extent sexual violence was underreported in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It would also be
interesting to know whether he had shared his
assessment of that issue with the Special Rapporteur on
violence against women, its causes and consequences
following her visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
68. She wondered whether the independent expert
had discussed the recommendation on the
establishment of a special international criminal
tribunal or joint criminal chambers with the Congolese
Government. Noting that at the most recent session of
the Human Rights Council he had supported the
mapping exercise of human rights violations launched
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights, she
sought his views on the complementarity between that
initiative and his recommendations, especially with
regard to their respective timing. He should provide
further details on his planned visits to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the coming months.
69. Mr. Ntakirutimana (Burundi), noting that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo had gone through a
difficult period where the law of the jungle had been
the order of the day in many areas, said that the
country’s authorities should be encouraged to achieve
their goal of peace and development. He found the
report too bleak and negative; it should have at least
mentioned the recent successful elections. Turning to
the region, he welcomed the progress achieved by the
Tripartite Commission Plus One and the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries in their
efforts to promote the development of those countries
and provide security for their people.
70. Mr. Pacéré (Independent expert on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo), responding to the questions raised, said that
given the size of the country and the magnitude and
severity of its problems, it was better, for the reports to
be of any use, to focus them on specific areas at a time.
He had accordingly focused the current report on
crimes committed by the security forces, sexual
violence and the prisons situation; that did not mean
that there were no problems in other areas of human
rights, nor that no efforts and progress had been made
in those areas.
71. While he had briefly referred to the elections at
the beginning of his report, he could not expand on the
matter because of the approach he had decided to adopt
and the need to comply with some rules, including with
respect to the number of pages per report and the
length of visits.
72. In response to the European Union representative’s
questions with regard to the establishment of an
international criminal tribunal or joint criminal
chambers, he noted that with crimes being rampant,
impunity was at an all time high yet, because of a lack
of resources, the courts were unable to deal with the
situation. The international community’s assistance
was therefore absolutely necessary and that was why
he had recommended the establishment of an
international criminal tribunal for the country or,
failing that, joint criminal chambers within existingA/C.3/62/SR.27
13 07-56535
Congolese courts, signalling a need for conducting a
mapping exercise on human rights violations. The
decision by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to launch the mapping exercise was
intended to address that situation and was consistent
with the Security Council resolution that called upon
the High Commissioner to assist the Congolese
Government to put an end to impunity.
73. With regard to the planned visits to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Bureau of the
Human Rights Council had established a schedule in
consultation with the Government and he intended to
travel to that country on 28 November 2007 and
expected to be able to return there in January or
February 2008.
74. Sexual violence raised the same concerns as other
human rights violations and, like those other
violations, could only be stamped out when security
and the system of justice were restored. The
Government authorities had informed him during a
meeting that every effort was made to put an end to
such violations but that it was obvious that the means
for achieving that goal were sorely lacking.
75. In response to the questions concerning statistics
on human rights violations, he said that he was in
constant touch with MONUC and the relevant bodies
in order to collect information. He received 200 to 250
pages of e-mail a day on human rights violations but it
was difficult to take the necessary action on all of
them; it was an area where time was of the essence and
he was doing the best that he could.
76. He had dealt with child soldiers at length in his
2006 report and, given the afore-mentioned constraints,
had excluded the topic from his current report.
77. Reacting to the comments of the representative of
Burundi, he said that there would be no peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo unless the
neighbouring States combined their efforts to assist
that country’s Government, which implied that they
were aware of what they needed to do to ensure their
own security and were also aware of the interests of
neighbouring States.
78. As to the Guinea-Bissau representative’s concern
that MONUC was not contributing to addressing the
prisons situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, he said that although the prisons were within
the purview of the justice system and the Government,
the international community could also provide
assistance. In any case, because of financial regulations,
MONUC funds could not be used to improve the
prisons situation.
79. Lastly, referring to the comments of the
representative of Rwanda, he said that he was fully
aware of the disastrous situation in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; his analyses
took into account the fact that that situation had to be
understood in the light of the events that occurred in
Rwanda in 1994.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.