United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.52
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
18 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-64848 (E)
*1064848*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 52nd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 23 November 2010, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 66: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 118: Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Completion of the work of the Third CommitteeA/C.3/65/SR.52
10-64848 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.46/Rev.1: Combating
defamation of religions
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Loulichki (Morocco), speaking on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, as well as
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Belarus,
introducing draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.46/Rev.1, said
that the text aimed to address the disturbing increase in
racist violence and manifestations of xenophobia
around the world, which were a matter for serious
concern. In certain cases, national policies stigmatized
groups of people belonging to certain religions or
belief systems, which legitimized discrimination and
impaired the ability of those people to enjoy their
rights to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
3. The Organization believed that all rights were
universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
as stated in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action. However, unrestricted and disrespectful
freedom of opinion fostered hatred and ran counter to
the spirit of peaceful dialogue and the promotion of
multiculturalism. Article 19 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which provided
for freedom of opinion, itself acknowledged that it
could be subjected to certain restrictions, and article 20
went on to suggest the prohibition of any advocacy of
racial or religious hatred.
4. While freedom of expression was one of the
cornerstones of any democratic society, the foundations
of such a society also needed guarantees for the respect
of the rights of others, to ensure the necessary balance
between all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Adopting measures to ensure respect for the right to
non-discrimination on any basis, as provided for in
international human rights law, was essential to
building and maintaining a healthy society. The
international community had repeatedly reaffirmed that
racism was incompatible with democracy. Acts of
incitement to religious hatred violated, inter alia, the
Charter of the United Nations, the International
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, and Security Council
resolution 1624 (2005).
5. The Organization of the Islamic Conference had
conducted three rounds of informal consultations on
the draft resolution and organized several meetings
with individual partners and regional groups. After
considering all proposals, a revised text had been
tabled. The sponsors had hoped to hold a constructive
dialogue in order to consolidate international efforts
and reach consensus, and remained determined to
continue in those endeavours.
6. The revised draft of the resolution stressed that
the vilification of any religion was a serious affront to
human dignity, restricting the freedom of religion of its
adherents and inciting religious hatred and violence. It
called for the prohibition of all such deplorable acts
against all religions; the fact that Islam was currently
the focus of such acts did not preclude the possibility
that other religions and their adherents could be
targeted in the future.
7. All States had agreed in the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy that terrorism could
not and should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group. They had also
agreed to promote a culture of peace and respect for all
religions, religious values, beliefs or cultures, and to
prevent the defamation of religions. States had
reaffirmed their commitment to implementing the
Strategy in all its aspects and in an integrated manner
in General Assembly resolution 62/272. It was also
pertinent to recall that a resolution entitled “combating
defamation of religions” had been adopted by
consensus in both 1999 and 2000.
8. In an effort to show a sign of compromise, the
references to the concept of “defamation” had been
reduced and/or replaced with that of “vilification”. The
draft embarked on a new approach by identifying the
problem, highlighting its gravity and broad-ranging
negative consequences and calling for cooperation at
all levels to tackle it, within the framework of existing
internationally agreed human rights instruments.
Several delegations had indicated that they would
support the draft if it dealt with all religions. The text
had been amended accordingly, so he urged thoseA/C.3/65/SR.52
3 10-64848
delegations to fulfil their pledges by supporting the
resolution.
9. He urged all Member States to demonstrate a
higher degree of sensitivity to the repeated requests by
a growing number of Members to address the abuse of
freedom of expression to insult religions and their
followers. The human rights bodies should respond to
that emerging phenomenon in order to preserve the
credibility of the system and affirm the universal and
interrelated nature of all human rights.
10. Mr. Nihon (Belgium), speaking on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries Croatia and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the
stabilization and association process countries
Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition, the Republic
of Moldova and Ukraine, said that the European Union
continued to believe strongly in tolerance,
non-discrimination and freedom of expression, thought
and religion or belief and was convinced that a
continuing dialogue on those issues could help
overcome existing differences of opinion. They shared
the concern about the victimization of people all over
the world due to their religion or belief. Efforts needed
to be increased to eliminate religious intolerance,
including by ensuring that legal systems provided
adequate and effective guarantees of freedom of
thought, conscience, religion and belief to all, without
distinction.
11. However, the European Union could not agree
with an approach that promoted the establishment of a
normative human rights concept to protect religions in
response to such concerns. The concept of
“defamation”, or indeed of “vilification”, was
inconsistent with international human rights law, which
protected individuals in the exercise of their freedoms
and did not, nor should not, protect religions, which
should not be viewed as homogenous entities. The
change in vocabulary in the text had not dispelled those
concerns. In addition, as in previous years, several
Special Rapporteurs had again highlighted the need to
address the concerns underlying the resolution within
the context of the established international legal
framework provided by the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights.
12. The concept of “defamation” or “vilification” of
religions risked seriously limiting the rights to freedom
of expression and of religion or belief, and endangered
the very openness and tolerance that allowed people of
different faiths to coexist and practice their faiths
without fear. Such limitations, or equally inadmissible
so-called blasphemy laws, would not address the
concerns behind the resolution. Instead, the solution
lay in the exercise of the right to free speech and an
open discussion of the relevant questions. Prohibition
of incitement to religious hatred was already
adequately addressed in article 20.2 of the Covenant.
13. The European Union condemned instances of
discrimination and intolerance against any individual
on the grounds of religion and had repeatedly
expressed its resolve to fight such phenomena. He
urged all States to show similar openness and
determination in dealing with their related challenges.
14. Despite continuing serious concerns over the
substance of the resolution, the European Union
sincerely appreciated the efforts of the delegation of
Morocco to look beyond the text as traditionally tabled.
The European Union remained willing to engage with
all interested partners seeking to address the
underlying concern about intolerance and would
support initiatives seeking to address the issue on the
basis of international law.
15. As a result of the concerns it had expressed, the
European Union was calling for a recorded vote on the
draft resolution and would be voting against it.
16. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that,
as it had done in the past, his country would vote
against the draft resolution. The United States had
participated in discussions in an effort to find cross-
regional solutions to the problems of religious
intolerance and hatred, and shared the sponsors’ deep
concern about the proliferation of discrimination and
the targeting of individuals based on their religion. The
goal had always been to find common ground
sufficient to overcome differences and negotiate a
resolution that could be adopted by consensus.
17. People could either choose to be defined by their
differences, giving in to a future of suspicion and
mistrust, or to forge common ground and commit to the
steady pursuit of progress. The United States was
committed to progress. The changes that had been
made to the resolution and the openness to discussion
were welcome, but despite those efforts the text still
seemed to further highlight the differences of opinion
rather than helping to bridge the historical divides. The
changes made to the text did not address the heart of
the concerns — the resolution’s negative implicationsA/C.3/65/SR.52
10-64848 4
for freedom of religion and freedom of expression. The
text also continued to refer to the problematic concept
of defamation, excluded many religions or belief
systems and equated defamation to a human rights
violation or incitement. It was important to remember
that human rights were held by individuals, not by
governments, institutions or religions, and the language
of the resolution should reflect that.
18. The United States looked forward to continuing
to work with the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and others to find an action-oriented
approach that could combat religious intolerance while
not penalizing those who exercised their freedom of
speech or religion. The necessary negotiations among
groups would take time and required patience and
understanding from all sides.
19. Ms. Fontana (Switzerland) said that her country
opposed the explicit recognition at the international
level of the concept of defamation of religions as a
form of racism, since racism had hitherto not included
a religious element. Switzerland also believed that
human rights existed to protect individuals, not
religions or other belief systems. Existing international
instruments — in particular articles 18, 19 and 20 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights — provided sufficient protection against
incitement to religious hatred.
20. While her delegation appreciated the efforts that
had been made by the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the changes that had been made to the text
had not responded to their main concerns. The term
“vilification” was simply a synonym of “defamation”.
The link between religion and racism had remained
intact, and religions rather than individuals remained
the focus of the resolution. For those reasons,
Switzerland would again vote against the draft
resolution.
21. At the request of Belgium, a recorded vote was
taken on draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.46/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, China, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Zambia.
Abstaining:
Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ecuador, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Nepal, Paraguay, Peru, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, United
Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu.
22. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.46/Rev.1 was adopted
by 76 votes to 64, with 42 abstentions.A/C.3/65/SR.52
5 10-64848
23. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that his delegation had
chosen to abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.
While the draft included several positive elements on
combating discrimination and hatred based on religion
or belief and promoted dialogue among civilizations
and beliefs, it also still contained elements that
conflicted with international law, preventing its
acceptance by Brazil.
24. In the context of international human rights law,
the concept of “defamation” or “vilification” of
religions was not applicable to the protection of a
religion in itself, but rather to the protection of an
individual’s right freely to profess that religion or not,
or indeed to convert to another, without any limitation
being imposed by the State. International law did not
prohibit defamation of a religion, but rather incitement
to discrimination, hatred or violence for religious
motives, among others, in accordance with article 19,
paragraph 3, and article 20, paragraph 2, of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
25. He recalled that the current Special Rapporteur
on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as
well as his predecessor, had advised replacing the
sociological concept of defamation of religions with
the juridical concept of incitement to national, racial or
religious hatred. Paragraph 13 of the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference
represented a good balance by reaffirming the
importance of freedom of expression while also
highlighting that it was crucial to curb discourse based
on hatred.
26. Brazil protected religious freedom and
recognized the importance of intercultural and
interfaith dialogue in politics. Having a secular State
did not mean restricting the free religious
manifestations of individuals or communities, but
instead guaranteed that freedom. Brazil was proud of
its multicultural, multiracial and multireligious society
and, in that regard, was honoured to have hosted the
third Global Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations.
27. Brazil recognized and was saddened by the acts
of intolerance and incitation to religious and ethnic
hatred that Muslims were suffering around the world. It
was, however, important to note that members of other
religions were also affected by similar phenomena,
including in Islamic countries.
28. Mr. Soares (United Kingdom) said that his
delegation had voted against the draft resolution and
wished to stress its unease with the introduction of the
term “Judeophobia”, which was a deviation from the
standard terminology: “anti-Semitism”. The distinction
between the two terms was unclear and there had not
been sufficient time to consider the potential
implications — the term could perhaps be perceived as
offensive by the individuals concerned and might have
an undertone of the very discrimination that the United
Nations had committed to tackle.
29. Mr. Chin (Singapore) said that his delegation had
voted for the resolution, on the understanding that it
would apply to all religions. Singapore was a
multiracial and multireligious city-state and as such it
was critical to ensure that the diversity of races,
religions and cultures did not become a source of
misunderstanding or friction. The exercise of the right
to free speech must not be at the expense of others, but
must be balanced with responsibility and
accountability. Defamation bred intolerance and
distrust and undermined social cohesion, so had no
place in society. Intolerance and ignorance must be
opposed, and understanding and respect encouraged.
30. Ms. Taracena Secaira (Guatemala) drew
attention to the information about her country’s
commitment to combat intolerance and discrimination
on the basis of religion or belief included in the report
of the Secretary-General on combating defamation of
religions (A/65/263). Protections were enshrined in the
country’s political Constitution and in the 1996 Peace
Agreements, in particular the Agreement on the
Identity and Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Guatemala
condemned all acts of defamation, incitation or
provocation — terms which were not at all
synonymous — against any religion, particularly at a
time when there had been demonstrations of the
tension and intolerance that could arise around certain
religious symbols, even in economically advanced,
democratic countries.
31. That being said, there was merit in the arguments
being made against the draft resolution. International
human rights case law focused on individuals rather
than belief systems. In addition, it was possible that
efforts to combat defamation of religions might curtail
the right to freedom of expression.
32. For those reasons, as it had done in previous
years, Guatemala had chosen to abstain in the voting.A/C.3/65/SR.52
10-64848 6
33. Mr. Bené (Observer for the Holy See) said that
his delegation welcomed the efforts of the sponsors to
move away from the concept of defamation, which
remained an unclear legal term in the current human
rights framework. Further efforts could be made during
future negotiations to address the important issues
contained in the resolution while also ensuring respect
for the balance between freedom of expression and the
right of people to practice their faith free of
discrimination. The most effective way of ensuring that
all people were able to exercise their freedom of
religion or belief was through an obligation to respect
that right.
34. The Holy See remained concerned that
implementation of the concept of defamation had given
rise to national legislation that undermined the
fundamental right to freedom of religion and
conscience, particularly for members of religious
minority groups. It thus called on all States to ensure
full respect for the human dignity and fundamental
rights of all.
35. Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) welcomed the adoption
of the resolution, stressing that it was responding to a
real need. The intensity of the debate on the issue itself
demonstrated its importance. He recognized that there
were fundamental differences in approach which could
not be overcome in one session, but efforts must and
would continue.
36. Tolerance and respect for human rights were
shared parameters on which to build. The Organization
of the Islamic Conference had made compromises and
amended the text in an effort to reach consensus.
Unfortunately, there had been no encouraging sign
from its partners in return. Rather than simply
presenting an identical resolution or making their
support for other similar resolutions conditional on
reciprocal support, the Organization had been
determined to listen to the concerns that had been
expressed and had presented a truly amended
resolution. It would return with the same determination
and openness the following year and hoped to arrive at
language that was agreeable for all.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.33/Rev.1: Programme of
activities of the International Year for People of
African Descent
37. Mr. Osorio (Colombia), introducing the draft
resolution, announced that Grenada, Guyana, Paraguay
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had joined
the sponsors.
38. The text before the Committee stemmed from
States’ intention to undertake activities, in the context
of the International Year for People of African Descent,
that would have a positive impact on their economic,
social, cultural, civil and political rights. The activities
aimed to promote greater awareness of and respect for
diversity and integration of those interests into the
international agenda. The United Nations system would
be involved in the proposed activities in a coordinating
and unifying role.
39. He introduced several amendments to the text. In
paragraph 2, the words “Takes note with appreciation
of” would be replaced with the word “Welcomes”, and
the words “bearing in mind” would be introduced later
in the paragraph, replacing the word “of” before the
reference to the recommendation contained in the report
of the Working Group of Experts on People of African
Descent. Additional text would be added at the end of
paragraph 4 to read: “, with the participation of the
Chair of the Working Group of Experts on People of
African Descent, the Chair of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, a
representative of people of African descent, civil society
and relevant stakeholders”. Lastly, in paragraph 7, the
words “and, as a guideline,” were to be replaced with
the words “, as well as”.
40. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had joined the sponsors:
Antigua and Barbuda, Haiti, India, Jamaica, Niger and
Nigeria.
41. Mr. Mashabane (South Africa) expressed his
thanks to the leadership of the Group of African States
for their work to achieve consensus, and to the
sponsors of the resolution for their flexibility in
dealing with the group’s concerns. As a result, he
withdrew the proposed amendments to the draft
resolution contained in document A/C.3/65/L.67.
42. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) made
a statement of programme budget implications.
Referring to paragraphs 4, 8 and 9 of the draft
resolution, he said that should the draft resolution be
adopted, total additional resource requirements of
$58,200 would arise, with regard to its paragraph 4:
(i) under section 2, General Assembly and EconomicA/C.3/65/SR.52
7 10-64848
and Social Council affairs and Conference
Management for conference-servicing for the holding
of the one-day high-level debate in 2011 ($22,500);
(ii) under section 23, Human rights, for travel to
participate in the one-day event of the Chair of the
Working Group of Experts on People of African
Descent, the Chair of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, a
representative of people of African descent ($29,200);
and under section 28D, Office of Central Support
Services for conference support services, such as sound
engineering ($6,500).
43. The terms of paragraph 8 were expected to give
rise to total additional requirements of $14,600 for
conference services, for the opening ceremony on
10 December 2010, anticipated to be held for a half
day: (i) under section 2, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council affairs and Conference
Management ($11,300); and (ii) under section 28D,
Office of Central Support Services for conference
support services such as sound engineering ($3,300).
The opening ceremony was not expected to generate
any additional requirements under section 23, Human
rights, as they would fall within provisions for events
that had already been planned.
44. The estimated additional requirements, which
amounted to $72,800, were proposed to be met within
the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011
under sections 2, 23 and 28D. Furthermore, the
Secretary-General would, to the extent possible,
implement the terms contained in paragraph 9 of the
draft resolution.
45. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.33/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
46. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that, despite its doubts about
the effectiveness of international decades, years and
days, the European Union was committed to the full
enjoyment of human rights by persons of African
descent. However, all victims of racism and
discrimination deserved the same protection; any
suggestion of a hierarchy between those victims should
be avoided, as that also risked creating new forms of
racism. It was crucial to adopt a global and universal
approach in the fight against racism and initiatives
supported by the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights should not be restricted to one ethnic
group.
47. The draft resolution, as tabled, had
accommodated the concerns of the delegations which
had been involved in the informal negotiations on its
text. The European Union deeply regretted the fact
that, by proposing amendments that had already been
thoroughly discussed, one delegation had tried to
renegotiate the compromise text. While certain oral
amendments were in line with the spirit of the balanced
text that had originally been agreed on, the European
Union wished to underline the fact that it could only
accept the revised wording of paragraph 4 on the
understanding that the related programme budget
implications would be drawn from existing resources.
48. Ms. Murillo (Costa Rica) expressed her
country’s satisfaction that the resolution had been
adopted by consensus.
49. Ms. Brichta (Brazil) said that her country
welcomed the adoption by consensus of the draft
resolution. The International Year symbolized the
political will of the international community to address
the specific challenges that people of African descent
faced in their efforts to fully enjoy their human rights.
The draft resolution was of particular significance to
her country as approximately 100 million Brazilians
were of African descent.
50. The meeting was suspended at 5.15 p.m. and
resumed at 5.35 p.m.
Agenda item 66: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.60: Global efforts for the
total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
51. Mr. Al-Shami (Yemen), speaking on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China and reading out oral
amendments to draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.60, said
that in paragraph 1, the words “World Conference”
should be replaced with “Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action”. In the phrase “their full andA/C.3/65/SR.52
10-64848 8
effective implementation”, the word “their” should be
replaced with “its”.
52. The third, fourth and fifth preambular paragraphs
should be deleted and replaced with the following
paragraph: “Recalling its resolution 64/148 of 26 March
2010 which, amongst others, called for the 10th Year
Commemoration of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action of the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance (WCAR), which represents an important
opportunity for the international community to reaffirm
its commitment to the eradication of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
including by mobilizing political will at the national,
regional and international level aimed at generating
concrete results.”
53. In the seventh preambular paragraph, the phrase
“and deeply regretting the slow progress made in
discharging its mandate” should be replaced with the
phrase “and encourages the Committee to continue
making progress in the discharge of its mandate”. The
twelfth and thirteenth preambular paragraphs should be
deleted.
54. A new fifteenth preambular paragraph bis should
be added, to read: “Acknowledges the centrality of
resource mobilization, effective global partnership and
international cooperation in the context of paragraphs
157 and 158 of the Durban Programme of Action for
the successful realization of commitments undertaken
at the World Conference”.
55. In the seventeenth preambular paragraph, after
the word “recognizing” the words “the continuing”
should be inserted. The words “her office” should be
replaced with “the office”. In the eighteenth preambular
paragraph, the phrase “also the conclusions and
recommendations” should be deleted. At the end of the
paragraph, the following phrase should be added: “and
looks forward to the Human Rights Council’s
consideration of those conclusions and recommendations”.
56. In the twentieth preambular paragraph, the word
“recent” should be inserted before the word “hosting”.
The words “and 2014” should be deleted. Between the
words “in South Africa and” and the words “in Brazil”,
the following phrase should be inserted: “looking
forward to the forthcoming 2014 International
Federation of Association Football World Cup”. The
word “respectively” should be deleted.
57. At the end of paragraph 3, the following phrase
should be added: “and the outcome document of the
Durban Review Conference”. At the end of paragraph 4,
the following phrase should be added: “recognizing
that combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance is a primary
responsibility of States”. In paragraph 5, after the
words “which include, inter alia”, the phrase
“incitement to such hatred, racial profiling” should be
replaced with the phrase “xenophobia, racial profiling,
incitement to racial, ethnic or religious hatred”.
58. In paragraph 8, the words “other related” should
be deleted. After the word “grounds”, the following
phrase should be inserted: “specified in the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action”. At the end of
the paragraph, the words “or other status” should be
deleted. At the end of the paragraph, the following
phrase should be added: “and the outcome document of
the Durban Review Conference”.
59. In paragraph 23, after the words “Member States
to”, the phrase “do their utmost to” should be inserted.
In paragraph 25, after the words “Special Rapporteur”,
the following phrase should be inserted: “on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”. In paragraph 29,
the word “closer” should be replaced with “the close”.
60. In paragraph 30, the word “Urges” should be
replaced with “Requests”. In the same paragraph, and
again in paragraph 31, the words “continue to” should
be inserted before the word “provide”. In paragraph 32,
after the words “the Special Rapporteur”, the phrase
“, within his mandate,” should inserted. The phrase “by
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,
immigrant populations, asylum-seekers and refugees”
should be deleted.
61. In paragraph 34, after the word “education”, the
following phrase should be inserted: “, including
human rights education and learning,”. In paragraph 35,
the word “closely” should be deleted. The phrase “so
that this concept will not be” should be replaced with
the phrase “with a view to preventing it from being”. In
paragraph 36, the words “this regard” should be
replaced with “combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”.
62. In paragraph 37, after the words “human rights
training”, the following phrase should be inserted:
“including on challenges of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intoleranceA/C.3/65/SR.52
9 10-64848
faced by migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers”. In
paragraph 38, the words “the concerned” should be
replaced with “those concerned”.
63. At the end of paragraph 45, the following phrase
should be added: “and the outcome document of the
Durban Review Conference”. Paragraphs 49 and 50
should be deleted and replaced with the following new
paragraph: “Decides to hold a one-day high-level
meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate the
Tenth Anniversary of the Adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, at the level of
heads of States and governments, on the second day of
the general debate of the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly, under the theme ‘Victims of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerances: recognition, justice and development’,
consisting of an opening plenary, consecutive round
tables/thematic panels and a closing plenary meeting;
and calls on the President of the General Assembly to
appoint co-facilitators to conduct consultations on the
scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-
level meeting”.
64. In paragraph 51, the word “political” should be
inserted after the words “short and concise”. After the
words “political will”, the words “at the national,
regional and international levels” should be inserted.
The phrase “the outcome of the 2009 Durban Review
Conference” should be replaced with the words “its
follow-up processes”.
65. In paragraph 55, after the words “Programme of
Action”, the phrase “and the Outcome Document of the
Durban Review Conference” should be inserted.
Paragraph 61 should be deleted.
66. Paragraph 62 should be replaced with the
following text: “Calls upon the Human Rights Council
to ensure that upon the consideration and adoption of
the conclusions and recommendations of the
Intergovernmental Working Group for the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, the recommendations are
brought to the attention of the relevant agencies for
adoption and implementation within their respective
mandates”.
67. Paragraph 63 should be replaced with the
following text: “Encourages the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to continue mainstreaming the
implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action in the whole United Nations
system, and in accordance with paragraphs 136 and
137 of the outcome document, which calls for the
establishment of the inter-agency task force to update
the Human Rights Council in this regard;”.
68. In paragraph 65, before the word “provide”, the
words “continue to” should be inserted.
69. Paragraph 66 should be replaced with the
following text: “Recalls the request to the Human
Rights Council to consider necessary measures to
enhance the effectiveness of the follow-up mechanisms
to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
and to ensure better synergy and complementarities in
the work of these mechanisms and looks forward to the
discussions with a view to enhance the interface among
and focus of follow-up mechanisms with a view to
achieve greater synchronization and coordination at all
levels, within their respective mandates, including
through restructuring and reorganization of their work
if deemed appropriate by the Human Rights Council,
and to allow joint discussions and meetings”.
70. In paragraph 69, the word “reverse” should be
replaced with “end”. Paragraph 72 should be deleted.
In paragraph 74, after the words “Programme of
Action”, the phrase “and the outcome document of the
Durban Review Conference” should be inserted.
71. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), after
seeking clarification from the budget division, said that
in view of the revisions made to the draft resolution,
the Budget Division would need to review any
programme budget implications arising therefrom and
would express itself on that matter before the draft
resolution was submitted to the General Assembly
plenary for final action. Any statement made by the
Budget Division would be made available under
rule 153 of the rules of procedure.
72. The Chair invited the Committee to take action
on the draft resolution. Member States would be
advised of any programme budget implications before
final action on the draft resolution was taken in the
General Assembly plenary.
73. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation had joined
the sponsors.
74. Ms. Goossens (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination should remain the basis for all efforts toA/C.3/65/SR.52
10-64848 10
combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance. The European Union was
convinced that the General Assembly must play a role
in promoting tangible improvements on the ground,
had negotiated in good faith on the draft resolution and
had tabled amendments that aimed to re-establish a
clear focus on the necessary fight against racism,
ensure conformity with international law and underline
the European Union’s commitment to protecting all
individuals from racism, regardless of the group or
community they belonged to. The European Union
regretted the fact that hardly any of its concerns had
been addressed and that it would be compelled to vote
against the draft resolution.
75. The commemoration of the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action should not be merely celebratory in nature,
but should aim to achieve tangible results. It should not,
moreover, distract attention or resources from the fight
against racism. The European Union was concerned by
the lack of reassurances from the main sponsors in that
regard and had reservations about the proposed day and
theme, as well as the reference to a political declaration
which had been proposed at a very late stage in the
negotiations. The European Union did not believe that
new international legal norms were required; the fight
against racism and discrimination should take place
within the existing international legal framework. It was
regrettable that the draft resolution prejudged the
outcome of the follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action by the Human Rights Council.
The list of contemporary forms and manifestations of
racism in the new paragraph 5 was not based on legal
grounds and the European Union could not agree with
paragraphs 9 and 12, as racism and its related challenges
needed to be fought while respecting other human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
76. The draft resolution failed to refer to the
obligations of States under international law, and did
not recognize the positive role that freedom of
expression could play in combating racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
The European Union regretted the selective reference
to groups and communities and believed that all
individuals, regardless of their ethnicity, religion or
community, should be protected against racism and
discrimination. Furthermore, the financial implications
of the amended operative paragraphs 49 and 50 in the
new draft resolution were unclear.
77. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland), also speaking on behalf
of Iceland, Liechtenstein, New Zealand and Norway,
said that those countries had participated in
negotiations on the draft resolution in good faith but a
lack of time and an unsatisfactory process had not
allowed more common ground to be found. Although
many of those countries’ concerns had been taken into
account in the draft resolution, it still contained issues
of grave concern which would compel them to abstain
in the vote. The draft resolution was inconsistent with
international humanitarian law, including articles 18,
19 and 20 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. The political declaration to be adopted
at the proposed high-level meeting, only a year after
the Durban Review Conference outcome document,
was unnecessary. The draft resolution also created a
hierarchy between different groups and communities
and did not make consistent reference to individual
members of groups, even though, under international
human rights law, it was individuals who were rights-
holders. The draft resolution failed to highlight States’
obligations at the national level to implement
international legal instruments in the fight against
racism. It was most regrettable that the international
community had not yet been able to reach consensus on
the question of all forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
78. Ms. Furman (Israel) said that her country had
always been willing to collaborate with other States to
combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance. Although the draft resolution
contained positive elements, neither Israel nor the
entire membership of the United Nations could forget
what had happened at the World Conference Against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance, which had been hijacked for the purpose
of demonizing Israel, and at the Durban Review
Conference. Israel was concerned that the tenth
anniversary of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action would likewise be derailed for political
purposes. Israel would therefore vote against the draft
resolution and had called for a recorded vote to be
taken.
79. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his country remained committed to engaging in an
ongoing thoughtful dialogue to effectively combat
racism. It remained deeply concerned by speech that
advocated national, racial or religious hatred. Based on
its own experience, the United States was convincedA/C.3/65/SR.52
11 10-64848
that the best antidote to offensive speech was a
combination of robust legal protection against
discrimination and hate crimes, proactive Government
outreach to racial and religious groups and the
vigorous defence of freedom of expression. Although
the United States would continue to engage with other
countries to promote freedom of expression and to
combat all forms of racism and racial discrimination,
elements contained in the draft resolution compelled it
to vote against the draft resolution.
80. It was, moreover, deeply troubling that the tenth
anniversary commemorative event would be held in
New York shortly after the tenth anniversary of the
attacks of 11 September 2001; a repeat of the vitriol
that had occurred at previous Durban-related events
risked undermining the United States’ relationship with
the United Nations.
81. Mr. Schaper (The Netherlands) expressed his
dismay that a series of substantive amendments to the
draft resolution had been introduced at the last moment
by its main sponsors, who had thus demonstrated a
fundamental disrespect for other delegations.
82. The principle of non-discrimination was a
cornerstone of the human rights system and was
enshrined in the Constitution of the Netherlands.
Furthermore, his country had enacted numerous
measures at the national and international levels to
combat racism and protect minorities. In that
connection, the international community must not be
distracted by efforts to promote other agendas. The
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action as well
as the Durban Review Conference had elevated the
protection of religion above the protection and
promotion of human rights by placing unnecessary
restrictions on freedom of expression, by ignoring
discrimination based on sexual orientation and by
implicitly singling out one country. The Netherlands
was obliged to vote against the draft resolution as it
could not support any resolution that expressed
unconditional support for the Durban Review
Conference and its declarations.
83. At the request of Israel, a recorded vote was
taken on draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.60.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Marshall Islands, Netherlands, Poland,
Romania, San Marino, Sweden, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Cyprus, Finland,
France, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Samoa, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine.
84. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.60 was adopted by
121 votes to 19, with 35 abstentions.A/C.3/65/SR.52
10-64848 12
85. Mr. Mashabane (South Africa) said that contrary
to what several delegations had said, attempts had been
made on several occasions to accommodate all
stakeholders. Almost all of the oral amendments to the
draft text had been intended for that purpose. The
Group of 77 and China had consistently sought to take
into account all views, while knowing that some
Member States would inevitably vote against the draft
resolution. The lack of consensus was unfortunate, and
should not create the impression that the Group of 77
and China was anything other than a willing partner in
the fight against racism.
86. The Chair suggested that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488, the Committee
should take note of the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the interim report of the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(A/65/295) and the report of the Secretary-General on
global efforts for the total elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
(A/65/377).
87. It was so decided.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/65/40, A/65/44, A/65/94, A/65/190,
A/65/317 and A/65/381)
88. The Chair suggested that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488, the Committee
should take note of the report of the Human Rights
Committee (A/65/40), volumes I and II; the report of
the Committee against Torture (A/65/44); the report of
the Secretary-General on the status of the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms
of Slavery (A/65/94); the note by the Secretary-
General transmitting the report of the chairs of the
human rights treaty bodies on their twenty-second
meeting (A/65/190); the note by the Secretary-General
on evaluation of the use of additional meeting time by
the human rights treaty bodies (A/65/317); and the note
by the Secretary-General on the Special Fund
established by the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment (A/65/381).
89. It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/65/87, A/65/156,
A/65/162,A/65/222,A/65/223, A/65/254,A/65/255,
A/65/256, A/65/260 and Corr.1, A/65/261,
A/65/274, A/65/282, A/65/284, A/65/287,
A/65/288, A/65/310, A/65/332 and A/65/369)
90. The Chair suggested that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488, the Committee
should take note of the note by the Secretariat on the
Report of the Working Group on the Right to
Development on its eleventh session (A/65/87); the
report of the Secretary-General on promotion and
protection of human rights, including ways and means
to promote the human rights of migrants (A/65/156);
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
interim report of the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the right to education (A/65/162); the
note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants
(A/65/222); the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights defenders (A/65/223); the
note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the independent expert on the issue of human rights
obligations related to access to safe drinking water and
sanitation (A/65/254); the note by the Secretary-
General transmitting the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health (A/65/255); the note by the Secretariat
concerning the report of the Secretary-General on the
right to development (A/65/256); the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the report of the
independent expert on the effects of foreign debt and
other related international financial obligations of
States on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
particularly economic, social and cultural rights
(A/65/260 and Corr.1); the note by the Secretary-
General transmitting the report of the Special
Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the
right to an adequate standard of living (A/65/261); the
note by the Secretary-General transmitting the interim
report of the Special Rapporteur on the independence
of judges and lawyers (A/65/274); the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the report of the
Representative of the Secretary-General on the humanA/C.3/65/SR.52
13 10-64848
rights of internally displaced persons (A/65/282); the
note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Representative of the Secretary-General on the
human rights of internally displaced persons (A/65/284);
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report
of the independent expert on minority issues (A/65/287);
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children (A/65/288); the
report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on the issue of human rights and transnational
corporations and other business enterprises (A/65/310);
the report of the Secretary-General on measures taken
to address systemic human resources issues raised by
the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and
Mediation Services (A/65/332); and the report of the
Secretary-General on regional arrangements for the
promotion and protection of human rights (A/65/369).
91. It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/65/331)
92. The Chair suggested that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488, the Committee
should take note of the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967 (A/65/331).
93. It was so decided.
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up
to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action (continued) (A/65/36)
94. The Chair suggested that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488, the Committee
should take note of the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (A/65/36).
95. It was so decided.
Agenda item 118: Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly (A/C.3/65/L.66)
96. The Chair said that he took it that the Committee
wished to adopt the draft programme of work submitted
by the Chair, contained in document A/C.3/65/L.66,
and to transmit it to the General Assembly for approval.
97. It was so decided.
Completion of the work of the Third Committee
98. The Chair said that the Committee had in most
cases been able to transcend divisions; a majority of
resolutions had been adopted by consensus with
numerous sponsors. In a range of areas, the Committee
had been able to enhance synergies and common
actions. Interactive dialogues had given rise to
stimulating discussions. However, restraint would be
required in future in order to avoid the unfortunate,
astonishing and indeed unacceptable situation in which
a Special Rapporteur had stated that the views
expressed by a Permanent Representative did not
reflect those of his Government.
99. Human rights were like a rainbow: they should
reflect both universality and diversity, and no one
colour should prevail. In an increasingly interdependent
world, in which a growing number of countries were
exposed to natural disasters and the vicissitudes of
history, the Third Committee could act as a forum for
action in order to restore hope.
100. After an exchange of courtesies, in which
Mr. Babadoudou (Benin), Mr. Vimal (India),
Ms. Kopicová (Czech Republic), Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica),
Ms. Fröberg (Finland), Mr. de Séllos (Brazil),
Ms. Freedman (United Kingdom), Mr. Salim (Egypt)
and Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) took part, the
Chair declared that the Third Committee had
completed its work for the main part of the sixty-fifth
session.
The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.