United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.47*
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
24 January 2011
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-61834* (E)
*0961834*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 47th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 24 November 2009, at 10 a.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 66: Indigenous issues (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 118: Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly (continued)
* Reissued for technical reasons on 10 December 2010.A/C.3/64/SR.47
09-61834 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.20/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.20/Rev.1: The girl child
1. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Nghifitikeko (Namibia), speaking on behalf
of the Southern African Development Community,
introduced the draft resolution and said that Algeria,
Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Burundi, Canada,
China, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, France, Ghana,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, Switzerland,
Togo, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Uruguay had become sponsors of the
draft resolution. Noting that the draft resolution
addressed major challenges faced by the girl child, he
invited States and the international community to take
appropriate action to prevent all forms of
discrimination and violence against the girl child.
3. Paragraph 19 of the draft resolution had been
revised as follows: after the words “forced labour”, the
words “and child and” should be deleted, while the
words “as well as marriage under legal age” should be
inserted after the words “forced marriage”.
4. He thanked all the sponsors for their efforts to
come up with a consensus document that would help to
ensure that girls had access to quality education, lived
in dignity, were free from fear and enjoyed good
health. He called upon those Member States that had
not yet done so to sponsor the draft resolution in order
to strengthen the promotion and protection of the rights
of girls throughout the world.
5. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Azerbaijan, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Colombia, the Congo, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Finland, the Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Iceland, Israel, Jamaica, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Nicaragua, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
the Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovenia, Suriname, Sweden, Turkey and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
6. Mr. Javaheri (Sweden), speaking also on behalf
of Switzerland, said that, while Sweden and
Switzerland had joined the consensus on that important
draft resolution, they believed that, with respect to the
oral revision to paragraph 19, the words “as well as
marriage under legal age” must be construed within the
meaning of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
7. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.20/Rev.1 was adopted
without a vote.
8. Ms. Sapag (Chile) said that the draft resolution
constituted a major step forward in the promotion of
the rights of the girl child. Her country looked forward
to the report that the Secretary-General had been
requested to submit on the issue of forced and child
marriage and hoped that it would contribute to the
effective implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. Her delegation endorsed the
Swedish delegation’s comments on the revision to
paragraph 19 and understood that it was meant to
address the concerns of countries whose legislation
provided for the marriage of children.
9. The Chairperson suggested that the Committee
should take note, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 55/488, of the report of the Secretary-General
on the girl child (A/64/315) and the note of the
Secretariat on the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on violence
against children (A/64/182).
10. It was so decided.
Agenda item 66: Indigenous issues (continued)
11. The Chairperson suggested that the Committee
should take note, in accordance with decision 55/488
of the General Assembly, of the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms of indigenous people, contained
in document A/64/338.
12. It was so decided.A/C.3/64/SR.47
3 09-61834
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action (continued)
(A/C.3/64/L.54/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.54/Rev.1: Global efforts for
the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
13. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) read out
a statement, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, on the programme
budget implications of paragraphs 13, 18, 22 and 49 of
the draft resolution. A total provision of
US$ 141,063,400 (before recosting) was proposed
under section 23, Human rights, of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011. The
requirements to implement the activities called for in
paragraphs 18, 22 and 49 of the draft resolution would
be met within those provisions. Extrabudgetary
resources would be utilized, if necessary, to implement
some of the activities falling under the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. It was
indicated, in the report of the Secretary-General on the
revised estimates resulting from resolutions and
decisions adopted by the Human Rights Council
(A/64/353), that the activities related to the
Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action were considered of a “perennial
nature”, and as such provisions had already been made
for them also in the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011 under sections 2, General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management and 28E, Administration,
Geneva, for conference servicing requirements.
14. With regard to paragraph 13, since the modalities
of the one-day plenary event were to be finalized
during the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly,
the programme budget implications of the event were
not known and the General Assembly would be
informed as soon as possible, according to established
procedures. Accordingly, should the Third Committee
adopt the draft resolution, there would be no
requirement for additional provisions under the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2010-
2011.
15. With regard also to paragraphs 18, 22 and 49 of
the draft resolution, attention was drawn to the
provisions of section VI of General Assembly
resolution 45/248 B and subsequent resolutions, the
most recent of which was resolution 62/236, in which
the Assembly had reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee
was the appropriate Main Committee entrusted with
responsibilities for administrative and budgetary
matters and had reaffirmed the role of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
16. Ms. Adhelrahman (Sudan), speaking on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China, said that the draft
resolution called on the Human Rights Council to
provide guidance and leadership in the follow-up to the
implementation of the decisions of the Durban Review
Conference and Programme of Action and requested
that the implementation of the outcome of the Durban
Review Conference should be undertaken in the same
framework and by the same mechanisms as the
outcome of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action. As 2011 would mark the tenth anniversary of
the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,
the Group of 77 and China requested that a plenary
meeting should be convened to commemorate that
anniversary.
17. The Group of 77 and China urged all Member
States to join the consensus on the draft resolution.
18. Ms. Shahar Ben-Ami (Israel), noting that her
delegation’s position on the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action and the Review Conference was
well known and had been explained on the occasion of
a previous vote, requested a recorded vote on the draft
resolution.
19. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that the United States was deeply committed to fighting
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance at home and abroad. Its founding
commitment to the principle that all people were
created equal was manifested in both its legislation and
policies to vigorously combat racist activities and
attitudes, and in its ongoing work with the international
community to fight prejudice based on race,
nationality, ethnicity, religion, gender or sexualA/C.3/64/SR.47
09-61834 4
orientation. The United States had recently presented
an Action Plan to Combat Racial and Religious
Discrimination and Intolerance during the session of
the Ad Hoc Committee on Complementary Standards
and would continue to work with other nations on
practical measures to combat racial intolerance and
discrimination.
20. The United States had not been able to support
the Durban Review Conference Outcome Document
because it endorsed the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action in toto and supported
prohibitions on freedom of expression. It remained
deeply concerned about speech that advocated national,
racial or religious hatred, but did not agree that the best
response was to restrict free speech. The best antidote
were robust legal protections against discrimination
and hate crimes, proactive outreach to racial and
religious groups and the vigorous defence of freedom
of expression. The United States regretted having to
vote against the resolution, and hoped to find common
ground on concrete approaches that both protected
freedom of expression and combated all forms of
racism and racial discrimination.
21. Ms. Merchant (Norway), speaking also on behalf
of Iceland, said that Iceland and Norway were fully
committed to the struggle against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Norway had actively participated in the Durban
Review Conference and had never doubted the need to
join in the struggle against racism. Iceland and Norway
had been sponsors of the draft decision on adoption of
the outcome document of the Durban Review
Conference. They had participated in good faith and
constructively in negotiations on the resolution under
consideration in the hope that they would once again
be able to vote in favour, thereof, and deeply regretted
that further negotiations had not been conducted. They
hoped that in the future negotiations would be more
transparent. For those reasons, Iceland and Norway
would abstain in the vote on the draft resolution.
22. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the European Union
wished to reiterate its full commitment to the fight
against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, all of which contravened the values
upon which the European Union was founded.
23. In Europe, organizations such as the Council of
Europe and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, together with a number of
non-governmental organizations, contributed
significantly to the fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
through independent monitoring and reporting
procedures, awareness-raising campaigns, research and
support for legal reform. Within the European Union,
the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights
supported, through data collection and analysis, the
implementation of European Union legislation to fight
racism and discrimination. The European Union was
well aware of its own problems in that regard and was
determined to address them through sustained action
based on the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. It
called for universal ratification of that instrument.
24. The Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance and the activities carried out under
his mandate played a major role in the fight against of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance at the international level. The European
Union welcomed the approach of the Special
Rapporteur, which attempted to anchor the debate in
the relevant existing international legal framework.
25. The European Union had participated actively in
the deliberations of the 2001 World Conference
Against Racism and had agreed on its final document
as a global agenda to eliminate racial discrimination all
over the world. Since then, the member States of the
European Union had focused their efforts on the full
implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action. The European Union had also
participated actively in preparations for the Durban
Review, the outcome of which should serve as a basis
for future work against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance in the Third
Committee, the Human Rights Council and all follow-
up mechanisms for the fight against racism and related
phenomena. However, paragraph 16 of the draft
resolution clearly went against the discussions on
streamlining of the Durban follow-up mechanisms.
26. With regard to the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Elaboration of Complementary Standards, the
European Union was not yet convinced of any
normative gaps and the need for any additional
international legal norms. It was important for the work
of the Ad Hoc Committee to be based on consensus
and be consistent with existing international norms.A/C.3/64/SR.47
5 09-61834
The European Union had voted against the draft
resolutions on that Committee’s mandate and could not
accept the positive references to that working group
contained in the draft resolution under consideration. It
was convinced that racism and related phenomena
should be combated while respecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms, notably freedom of expression,
and would therefore have liked to see stronger
language on the role that freedom of expression could
play in combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
27. With regard to the upcoming commemoration of
the tenth anniversary of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, the European Union recalled
that a review conference had just taken place, and
would have liked some more clarity on the budget
implications of the planned commemoration.
28. Furthermore, the European Union believed that
broader negotiations would have produced a better
text, and reiterated its doubts about whether some
parties were genuinely interested in maintaining the
consensus on the Durban follow-up process and on the
fight against racism. For all those reasons, the
European Union could not lend its support to the draft
resolution.
29. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.54/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Germany, Israel, Italy, Marshall Islands,
Netherlands, Palau, Poland, Romania, United
States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Vanuatu.
30. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.54/Rev.1 was adopted
by 122 votes to 13, with 45 abstentions.1
31. The Chairperson suggested that the Committee
should take note of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Global efforts for the total elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of
and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action” contained in document
A/64/309.
__________________
1 The delegation of Niger subsequently indicated that, had
it been present, it would have voted in favour of the draft
resolution.A/C.3/64/SR.47
09-61834 6
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.43/Rev.1: Protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism
32. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
33. Mr. De León Huerta (Mexico), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.43/Rev.1, said that, because of
divergent views on the report of the Special
Rapporteur, the sponsors had tried to make the draft
resolution as neutral as possible, in particular
paragraph 12, which mentioned the report without
expressing an opinion thereon or referring to the
report’s recommendations or its more controversial
elements. However, since all the proposals to refer to
that report in a neutral manner had been rejected during
negotiations, he wished to propose several revisions in
a final attempt to reconcile divergent positions.
34. The fifth preambular paragraph should be moved
and inserted immediately after the second preambular
paragraph, and a seventeenth preambular paragraph
that read as follows should be added: “Recalling also
Human Rights Council resolution 6/28 of 14 December
2007, by which the Council decided to extend the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism;”. In the English
version, at the end of paragraph 6 (f) the word “those”
should be replaced by “these”. Paragraph 6 (j) should
be revised to read: “Insofar as such an act runs contrary
to their obligations under international law, not to
expose individuals to danger of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment by way of return to
another country.” Finally, paragraph 18 should now be
inserted immediately after paragraph 16; the word
“policies” in that paragraph should be replaced with
the word “programmes”; and the words “in accordance
with relevant national legislation” should be inserted at
the end of that paragraph. The goal of the draft
resolution was to ensure that measures taken to combat
terrorism were consistent with international obligations
under international human rights law.
35. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Ukraine had become a sponsor of the
draft resolution.
36. Mr. Monteiro Cardoso (Cape Verde) said that
his delegation wished to be removed from the list of
sponsors.
37. Ms. Kondolo (Zambia), speaking on behalf of the
African Group, expressed concern at the attempt, in the
report of the Special Rapporteur, to marginalize the
relevant human rights issues that needed to be urgently
addressed and to redefine gender. The Group regretted
that the Special Rapporteur had departed from the
Code of Conduct for Special Procedures Mandate-
holders thereby exceeding his mandate, in order to
promote the Yogyakarta Principles.
38. The fact that the reference to that report had been
retained in the draft resolution forced the African
Group to propose two amendments. The first
amendment was to replace the words “the report of the
Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism” in
paragraph 12 with the words “the previous work of the
Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
undertaken according to his mandate, based on
Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/80 of
21 April 2005 and Human Rights Council resolutions
5/1 and 5/2 of 18 June 2007 and 6/28 of 14 December
2007.” The second amendment was to change the
wording of paragraph 19 to read as follows: “Requests
the Special Rapporteur to continue to make
recommendations within the context of his mandate,
with regard to preventing, combating and redressing
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in the context of countering terrorism;”.
39. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) requested a
recorded vote on each of the two proposed
amendments.
40. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that a recorded vote would be taken on the first
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.43/Rev.1,
concerning paragraph 12.
41. Ms. Melon (Argentina), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that the sponsors of the
draft resolution had actively sought to reconcile theA/C.3/64/SR.47
7 09-61834
divergent opinions expressed by the various countries,
in order to produce a balanced draft resolution. She
recalled that reports of Special Rapporteurs were useful
in terms of stimulating discussion; that it was vital to
ensure the independence of the Special Rapporteur’s
work; and that the report in question had been
reviewed and discussed by the Committee. Since her
delegation considered it undesirable to impose a
wording that did not reflect all the positions expressed
during the negotiations, she invited Member States to
vote in favour of maintaining the neutral language of
paragraph 12, which made no mention of the content,
conclusions and recommendations of the report.
42. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) urged the
sponsors of the draft resolution, and all other
delegations, to vote against the proposed amendment.
43. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the revised draft
resolution referred only in very weak terms to the
report of the Special Rapporteur. The inability to reach
an agreement on the text was therefore regrettable. The
European Union hoped that the various countries
would not become more deeply divided and that
delegations would defend the existing text by voting
against the proposed amendment.
44. Ms. Richardson (New Zealand) said that, while
her delegation did not necessarily endorse the report of
the Special Rapporteur, it was not uncommon to take
note of a report in order to accommodate divergent
opinions. That was precisely the aim of the revised
draft resolution introduced by Mexico. New Zealand,
which supported the independence of the special
procedures system, would vote against the proposed
amendments, since it considered that they could create
an unfortunate precedent.
45. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation would vote in favour of the amendment
proposed by the Group of African States. The Special
Rapporteur had departed from the Code of Conduct
adopted by the Human Rights Council and the mandate
conferred on him. He had tried to interpret the text that
the Member States had adopted by consensus in line
with his own ideas, which had nothing to do with
international law and international instruments.
46. A recorded vote was taken on the first amendment
proposed by Zambia.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, China, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brazil, Congo, Fiji, Grenada, India, Indonesia,
Nepal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Singapore, Sri Lanka,A/C.3/64/SR.47
09-61834 8
Suriname, Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uzbekistan.
47. The first proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.43/Rev.1 was adopted by 77 votes to 73,
with 23 abstentions.2
48. The Chairperson said that a recorded vote had
been requested.
49. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that a recorded vote would be taken on the second
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.43/Rev.1
proposed by Zambia on behalf of the Group of African
States. The proposal was to delete the words “to
continue” from paragraph 19.
50. Ms. Kondolo (Zambia), speaking on behalf of the
Group of African States, said that the Group was
disappointed in the report of the Special Rapporteur
and considered that he had exceeded his mandate in
making his recommendations. It had therefore
proposed a second amendment in order to ensure that
future recommendations of the Special Rapporteur
were made in the context of his mandate.
51. Ms. Flood-Beaubrun (Saint Lucia), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said it was
regrettable that the draft resolution in question would
not be adopted by consensus as in previous years. At
the time of the introduction of the report (A/64/211),
her delegation had expressed its opposition to the
incorporation of the Special Rapporteur’s personal
ideas about what a gender perspective meant in the
context of his mandate. It had lamented the fact that
the Special Rapporteur had exceeded his mandate,
unilaterally attempted to change the definition of a
universally accepted term, based his definition on
premises that did not exist in international human
rights law and made undefined terms the main focus of
his work.
52. She reiterated her delegation’s request for the
Special Rapporteur to provide real guidance on
counter-terrorism measures from a gender perspective.
The Special Rapporteur’s departure from his mandate
had consequences for all Member States and for
victims of gender-based discrimination in the context
of counter-terrorism efforts. The United Nations sought
__________________
2 The delegation of the Congo informed the Committee
that, although the voting record showed an abstention for
her country, it had voted in favour of the draft
resolution.
to ensure that the terms used in its work were
understood and agreed upon by all Member States and
that outcome documents reflected varying perspectives.
Accepting the Special Rapporteur’s definition of
gender without serious discussion would undermine
those efforts.
53. Her delegation, recognizing the significance of
the Special Rapporteur’s work, was awaiting a true
report from him on the protection of fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism within the context
of his mandate. It would vote in favour of the draft
amendment proposed by Zambia.
54. A recorded vote was taken on the second
amendment proposed by Zambia.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,A/C.3/64/SR.47
9 09-61834
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brazil, Grenada, India, Indonesia, Nepal, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uzbekistan.
55. The second proposed amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.43/Rev.1 was adopted by 81
votes to 73, with 20 abstentions.
56. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that her delegation, as a sponsor of the
draft resolution, believed that the failure to mention the
report of the Special Rapporteur could set a dangerous
precedent. However, it had voted in favour of the two
amendments proposed by the Group of African States,
since it considered that the Special Rapporteur had
exceeded his mandate. It was regrettable that those
discussions had eclipsed the substantive debate on the
draft resolution. She appreciated the efforts that
Mexico had made during the negotiations to
accommodate the different positions taken on the
Special Rapporteur’s report.
57. Mr. Tarar (Pakistan) said it was regrettable that
the Special Rapporteur had departed from his mandate
and that his controversial report had prevented a
consensus from being reached on that important draft
resolution. His delegation supported the amendments
proposed by the Group of African States and hoped
that, in the future, Special Rapporteurs would respect
intergovernmentally agreed mandates.
58. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following delegations had joined
the sponsors: Angola, Azerbaijan, Benin, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Dominica, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal,
Somalia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.
59. Mr. Preston (United Kingdom) said that his
delegation wished to withdraw from the list of
sponsors of the revised draft resolution as amended.
60. The Chairperson said that a recorded vote would
be taken on draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.43/Rev.1, as
orally revised and amended.
61. Ms. Kondolo (Zambia) said that the Group of
African States thanked those countries that had voted
in favour of the proposed amendments and was pleased
that the draft enjoyed the support of a majority of
Member States. Her delegation would vote in favour of
the revised draft resolution, as amended.
62. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico), speaking on
behalf of the sponsors, said that they were disappointed
that the draft resolution had been amended. They
would, however, vote in favour of the draft resolution
as amended, since the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism was
a very important issue. Furthermore, the sponsors did
not consider the draft resolution, as amended, to be a
motion of no confidence in the Special Rapporteur,
whose work continued to promote respect for human
rights. They therefore encouraged all delegations to
vote in favour of the draft resolution.
63. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.43/Rev.1, as orally amended and revised.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,A/C.3/64/SR.47
09-61834 10
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Saint Kitts and Nevis.
64. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.43/Rev.1, as orally
amended and revised, was adopted by 181 votes to
none, with 1 abstention.
65. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that her
delegation had voted in favour of the amendments
proposed by the African Group because it had felt that
all human rights special procedures mandate holders
had to comply with their Code of Conduct. However,
that did not mean that Cuba agreed to give to the
Human Rights Council powers or prerogatives beyond
the ambit of the United Nations Charter.
66. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said it was regrettable that a
consensus could not be reached on the draft resolution,
but thanked Mexico, its main sponsor. The text adopted
did not accurately reflect the position of the European
Union, which felt that special procedures mandate
holders should be able to discharge their mandates in
complete independence. Special procedures were
meant to encourage discussion among States, in order
to enhance the protection of human rights for all, and
the European Union hoped that those procedures would
be maintained.
67. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) said it was
regrettable that a consensus could not be reached on
such a vital question and reiterated his delegation’s
commitment to the activities of the Human Rights
Council. A great deal of impartiality was required to
protect human rights throughout the world. He hoped
that, in 2010, discussions with the different groups and
countries would help generate a consensus, without any
delegation having to abandon its principles or
convictions.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.44/Rev.1: International
Year for People of African Descent
68. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
69. Ms. Blum (Colombia) introduced draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.44/Rev.1, entitled “International Year for
People of African Descent” on behalf of the sponsors.
The text was the result of a compromise among the
delegations that had participated in the informal
consultations on the initial draft. The International
Year, to begin on 1 January 2011, would increase
awareness among States and the international
community of the need to promote policies and actions
to ensure the full enjoyment by people of African
descent of all their rights.
70. The legal framework for the International Year
was recalled in the preamble while its objectives were
described in paragraph 1. The text also requested the
Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fifth session a report containing a draft
programme of activities for the International Year. She
hoped that the draft resolution would be adopted by
consensus, and noted that Belize and the United States
of America had become sponsors of the draft
resolution.A/C.3/64/SR.47
11 09-61834
71. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.44/Rev.1 was adopted
without a vote.
72. Ms. Blum (Colombia) welcomed the adoption
without a vote of the draft resolution, and hoped that it
would help to promote the exercise by people of
African descent of their rights and combat
discrimination against them. People of African descent
accounted for a significant proportion of the population
of the States that had sponsored the draft resolution.
Those States were committed to the adoption of special
measures to encourage the participation of those people
both as actors in and beneficiaries of development.
73. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the European Union had
been pleased to join the consensus even though it had
some reservations about the utility of international
years. However, she hoped that the International Year
for People of African Descent would help those people
enjoy all their rights. The sponsors had allayed the
European Union’s concerns by ensuring that the
International Year concerned all human rights and
would not have any programme budget implications.
74. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) said that his delegation
had joined the consensus despite its initial criticisms.
He rejected the marginalization and misery-driven
clichés traditionally associated with black people as a
consequence of slavery and colonization. Each
government had to ensure that its people fully enjoyed
their human rights. Through negotiations, it had been
possible to reach a consensus, which Benin was
joining. His delegation viewed the initiative as an
appeal from the sponsors to the international
community to perhaps help them to resolve their
national problems.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.49: Human Rights and
Cultural Diversity
75. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that China had become a sponsor of the
draft resolution. Presenting a statement of the
programme budget implications of the draft resolution
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, he said that the additional
provisions made in the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011 in response to the request
contained in resolution 10/23 of the Human Rights
Council would help to implement the activities of the
new special procedures procedure entitled:
“independent expert in the field of cultural rights”. The
resource implications to support the preparation of a
report as mandated in the draft resolution would
therefore be met within the provisions of the proposed
programme budget. If adopted, the draft resolution
would not have any budget implications for the
biennium 2010-2011.
76. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) introducing the draft
resolution for the first time on behalf of the 118
member countries of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, pursuant to the commitment made by their
leaders to contribute to the implementation of the
Tehran Declaration and Programme of Action on
Human Rights and Cultural Diversity, said that the
draft resolution would subsequently be presented every
two years.
77. Cultural diversity contributed to the enrichment
of humankind and must be respected throughout the
world. Following many informal and bilateral
consultations, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries had endeavoured to propose a draft
resolution formulated in fairly neutral terms, even
using some of the language from texts presented
recently by European States, in the hope of obtaining
the support of all Member States.
78. Regrettably, despite the openness of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, it had not been
possible to adopt that vital draft resolution by
consensus because of the rigid stance of a few
countries that insisted that their point of view should
prevail. The sponsors had originally planned to submit
a text that reflected revisions agreed during the
negotiations, but had decided, given the likelihood of
the draft resolution being put to a vote, to submit the
initial version of the draft to the Committee. She
nevertheless urged all the member countries of the
Non-Aligned Movement and other countries to adopt
the draft resolution.
79. Paragraph 16 had been revised; the word “invite”
should be inserted after the words “High Commissioner
and”.
80. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that El Salvador had become a sponsor of
the draft resolution.
81. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia andA/C.3/64/SR.47
09-61834 12
Turkey; the stabilization and association process
countries Albania and Montenegro; and, in addition,
Australia, Iceland, Liechtenstein, New Zealand,
Norway, Republic of Moldova, Switzerland and
Ukraine, said that the European Union, which had
participated in the negotiations on the text in a
constructive manner, attached great importance to
cultural diversity, which could only be defended if
human rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular
freedom of expression and information, were
guaranteed. All States had a duty to ensure that those
rights were respected. Human rights were universal and
could not be judged based on any cultural relativism.
That was why the European Union had proposed that a
reference should be made in the text to one of the
fundamental principles of the UNESCO Universal
Declaration on Cultural Diversity: “No one may invoke
cultural diversity to infringe upon human rights
guaranteed by international law, nor to limit their
scope.” Regrettably, that proposal had been rejected.
82. The European Union was also concerned about
the frequent reference in the text to “universally
accepted human rights”, which gave the impression
that some human rights were not universally accepted.
The European Union regretted that that wording had
not been changed, as had been the case during the
negotiations on Human Rights Council draft resolution
10/23. In addition, the European Union disapproved of
the reference, in the preamble, to a meeting held in
2007 outside the United Nations framework and
attended by only some Member States. Expressing
regret that the text presented did not reflect any of the
European Union’s proposals, she requested a recorded
vote on the draft resolution and urged Member States
to vote against it.
83. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that respect
for cultural diversity, understanding among peoples,
and protection of human rights were fundamental
principles which were, moreover, closely linked to
economic development, peace and security, particularly
in the current global context. Hence, it went without
saying that any effort to promote tolerance and respect
for diversity would not infringe upon human rights
guaranteed by international law. Human rights were
indivisible and interdependent and the international
community had to consider them as such. While
cultural and historical differences could not be ignored,
all States had a duty to protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
84. At their fifteenth summit in Sharm el-Sheikh, the
Heads of State and Government of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries had reaffirmed the importance
of the Convention on the Protection and Promotion of
the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, and had called
upon all Member States to become parties thereto.
They had also advocated the implementation of the
principles contained in the Tehran Declaration and
Programme of Action through the rapid adoption of
appropriate instruments by the United Nations. The
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which had done
its utmost to take the concerns of all States into
account, was deeply disappointed that those States
requesting a recorded vote had not acknowledged those
efforts. He called on all States to vote in favour of that
important draft resolution.
85. Ms. Mitchell (Canada), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, expressed regret that the
draft resolution had not taken into account her
delegation’s suggestions, which had been designed to
ensure that cultural diversity was not invoked in an
effort to limit the scope of universal human rights
guaranteed by international law. Consequently, Canada
would not be able to vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
86. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, said that governments had a responsibility to
cooperate in ensuring the exercise of the rights and
freedoms contained in international human rights law.
His delegation had worked to find language adequately
specifying that the concept of cultural diversity should
be anchored to international human rights law, and
could not be used to legitimize human rights abuses.
Regrettably, that point was not set forth clearly in the
draft text. His delegation would therefore vote against
the draft resolution. The United States of America
shared the concerns raised by the representatives of
Canada and Sweden.
87. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.49.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),A/C.3/64/SR.47
13 09-61834
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Armenia, Fiji, Japan, Timor-Leste.
88. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.49 was adopted by
125 votes to 50, with 4 abstentions.
89. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said it was
regrettable that the group of Western European and
other States had insisted on putting the draft resolution
to a vote. The non-aligned States had made every effort
to take into account the concerns that had been
expressed, notably by the delegation of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union. Those States were bent
on eliminating the cultural rights of other peoples and
had shown a lack of tolerance towards other cultures.
90. Ms. Medal (Nicaragua) said it was regrettable
that the draft resolution had not been adopted without a
vote, as in the past. States that claimed to be defenders
of human rights should discard their policy of double
standards and commit themselves to the promotion and
protection of all human rights without any selectivity.
91. Mr. González (Costa Rica) said that his
delegation endorsed the use of the phrase “universal
human rights” in paragraph 11. Costa Rica was an
ardent defender of cultural diversity and pluralism,
which should not, however, open the door to cultural
relativism. Human rights were universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated.
92. Ms. Sapag (Chile) said her delegation, which
was of the view that human rights were universal,
indivisible and interdependent, categorically rejected
any interpretation that tended to limit those rights and
had therefore voted in favour of the draft resolution.
93. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said it was regrettable that, despite the
flexibility of the non-aligned States, certain members
of the European Union had rejected that important
draft resolution, which had been adopted without a
vote two years before. Her delegation failed to
understand how certain States could speak of tolerance,
peace and the promotion of human rights while at the
same time hindering dialogue and understanding
between peoples.
94. The Chairperson declared that the Committee
had concluded its consideration of draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.49.
95. He suggested that before concluding the
consideration of agenda item 69 as a whole, the
Committee should, in accordance with General
Assembly decision 55/488, take note of the following
documents: Report of the Committee against TortureA/C.3/64/SR.47
09-61834 14
on the work of its forty-first and forty-second sessions
(A/64/44); Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture
(A/64/264); Report of the Secretary-General on the
status of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on
Contemporary Forms of Slavery (A/64/306 and
Corr.1); Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the equitable
geographical distribution in the membership of the
human rights treaty bodies (A/64/212); Note by the
Secretary-General on effective implementation of
international instruments on human rights, including
reporting obligations under international instruments
on human rights (A/64/276); Report of the Secretary-
General on strengthening United Nations action in the
field of human rights through the promotion of
international cooperation and the importance of
non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity
(A/64/175); Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of migrants (A/64/188); Report of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the
issue of human rights and transnational corporations
and other business enterprises (A/64/216); Note by the
Secretary-General on the independence of judges and
lawyers (A/64/181); Note by the Secretary-General on
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
(A/64/187); Note by the Secretary-General on the
human rights of migrants (A/64/213 and Corr.1); Note
by the Secretary-General on the right to adequate
housing (A/64/255); Note by the Secretary-General on
the Right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health
(A/64/272); Report of the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the right to education (A/64/273);
Report of the independent expert on the question of
human rights and extreme poverty (A/64/279); Note by
the Secretary-General on the effects of foreign debt and
other related international financial obligations of
States on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
particularly economic, social and cultural rights
(A/64/289 and Corr.1); Report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (A/64/36).
96. It was so decided.
Agenda item 118: Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly (continued)
Tentative programme of work of the Third Committee
for the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly,
submitted by the Chairman of the Committee
(A/C.3/64/L.64)
97. The Chairperson said he took it that the
Committee wished to adopt the draft programme of
work and transmit it to the President of the General
Assembly for consideration by the Assembly in plenary
session.
98. It was so decided.
99. The Chairperson declared that the Committee
had completed its work for the main part of the sixty-
fourth session.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.