United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.34
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
3 March 2010
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-58320 (E)
*0958320*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 34th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 29 October 2009, at 10 a.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
Agenda item 61: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 62: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)A/C.3/64/SR.34
09-58320 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights
of children (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.20 and Rev.1
and A/C.3/64/L.21 and Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.20: The girl child
1. Mr. Mbuende (Namibia), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.20 on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), said that
Chile and Guatemala had become sponsors. The
Convention on the Rights of the Child notwithstanding,
girls continued to be victims of all forms of
discrimination and violence. The draft resolution urged
Member States to undertake legal reforms with a view
to protecting the fundamental rights and freedoms of
girls and promoting gender equality in all areas. As in
previous years, the SADC hoped that with the support
of Member States, the draft resolution would be
adopted by consensus.
2. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Armenia, Belarus, Cameroon, Cape Verde, the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Honduras,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Nigeria, Panama,
Paraguay, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and Uzbekistan had also
become sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.21: Rights of the child
3. Ms. Edblom (Sweden), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.21 on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, said that Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Monaco, Montenegro, the Republic of
Moldova and Serbia had become sponsors. The
Convention on the Rights of the Child was the most
universally ratified of the human rights instruments,
and the draft resolution traditionally received broad
support. The sponsors therefore hoped that it would
once again be adopted by consensus.
4. The draft resolution focused on the right to be
heard, a general principle which was established in
article 12 of the Convention and, more recently, was
the subject of General Comment No. 12, adopted at the
fifty-first session of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child. The substantive part of the resolution dealt with
measures that Member States and other actors must
take in order to enable children to exercise that right
safely and meaningfully. It also reaffirmed the
importance of a good education and the role of schools
in promoting children’s participation, and recognized
the role of parents and other caregivers in that regard.
5. In order to allow for more thorough discussion of
and more open consultation on the issue, the sponsors
had amended the format of the draft resolution, which
remained general in scope and which took a more
forward-looking approach that focused on current
developments; thus, it made reference to the financial
crisis and to the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children.
6. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Azerbaijan, Belarus, Cameroon, Cape Verde, the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, the Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste and Ukraine had also become
sponsors.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/C.3/64/L.22, L.23 and L.24)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.22: International
Covenants on Human Rights
7. Ms. Fröberg (Finland), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.22 on behalf of its sponsors, said
that Albania, Armenia, Australia, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, El Salvador,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Malta, Montenegro, Poland, the
Republic of Moldova and Serbia had become sponsors.
The draft resolution focused on recent developments in
international law and, in particular, the adoption of the
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights by the General
Assembly. The Optional Protocol had been signed by
30 countries and needed to be ratified by 10 more
States in order to enter into force. The purpose of the
draft resolution was to place the Optional Protocol on
an equal footing with the two Optional Protocols to theA/C.3/64/SR.34
3 09-58320
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and to highlight the work of the Human Rights
Committee, which had recently adopted a General
Comment on the obligations of States parties under the
first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, and of the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which had
adopted General Comments on the right to social
security and on non-discrimination in economic, social
and cultural rights. Consultations were ongoing, and
she hoped that the draft resolution would be adopted by
consensus.
8. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Cape Verde, the Congo, Honduras and Peru had
also become sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.23: Torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
9. Ms. Raabymagle (Denmark), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.23 on behalf of the sponsors,
said that Albania had become a sponsor and that China
had been erroneously included in the list of sponsors.
Recalling that freedom from torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment was a
non-derogable right that must be protected under all
circumstances, the draft resolution urged States to
ensure that secret places of detention and interrogation
were abolished and emphasized that conditions of
detention must respect the dignity and human rights of
detainees. It stressed the importance of cooperation
between States and the three pillars of the United
Nations system on the issue of torture: the Special
Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment; the Committee against Torture; and the
Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
The relevant provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights notwithstanding, torture remained
difficult to combat because it was so often conducted in
secret.
10. It had been 11 years since Denmark had first
introduced the annual omnibus resolution seeking to
strengthen protection against torture. He hoped that the
draft resolution would be adopted as usual with the
support of all members of the Committee.
11. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Andorra, Azerbaijan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Cape Verde, the Congo, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Honduras, Kyrgyzstan, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Mongolia, Paraguay, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova and Timor-Leste had become
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.24: Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional
Protocol thereto
12. Ms. Hill (New Zealand), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.24 on behalf of the sponsors,
said that Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia,
Denmark, Germany, Honduras, Montenegro, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Panama, Peru, Portugal, the Republic of
Moldova, San Marino, Serbia and Togo had become
sponsors. The Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities had gained support more rapidly than
any other human rights instrument. In the past year
alone, the number of States parties to the Convention
had doubled, and it had already been signed by 150
countries. The straightforward text of the draft
resolution highlighted the progress made. She urged
delegations to support the draft resolution so that it
could be adopted by an even broader consensus than
the previous year.
13. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Benin, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Cyprus, the Congo, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Greece, India, Italy,
Jamaica, Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania, Malawi, Morocco,
Namibia, Uganda, Paraguay, the Philippines, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and
Yemen had joined the list of sponsors.
Agenda item 61: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating
to the world social situation and to youth, ageing,
disabled persons and the family (A/C.3/64/L.4/
Rev.1) (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.4/Rev.1: Policies and
programmes involving youth
14. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
15. Ms. Sow (Senegal), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.4/Rev.1 on behalf of the sponsors, said that
Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Finland, theA/C.3/64/SR.34
09-58320 4
Gambia, Hungary, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, the
Niger, the Republic of Korea and Turkey had become
sponsors. The priority areas of the World Programme
of Action for Youth were interrelated and their
implementation would promote achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, particularly those
aimed at reducing poverty. She hoped that the draft
resolution would be adopted by consensus.
16. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Angola, Belize, Benin, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, the Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
the Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mali, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, South Africa, Swaziland,
Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Ukraine and
Uruguay had become sponsors of the draft resolution.
17. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.4/Rev.1 was adopted
without a vote.
18. Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) said that she
welcomed the adoption by consensus of the draft
resolution and thanked the sponsors for taking into
account the majority of the comments made by her
delegation. She noted that extremist ideologies,
including neo-Nazism and neo-Fascism, were among
the main threats to youth and that further efforts in that
regard were particularly important on the eve of the
sixty-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second World
War.
Agenda item 62: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/64/L.16 and Rev.1, L.18 and L.25*)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.18: Violence against migrant
women workers
19. Ms. Banzon-Abalos (Philippines), introducing
draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.18 on behalf of the sponsors,
said that Belarus had become a sponsor. Over the past
20 years, approximately half of all migrant workers
had been women. Typically, they migrated only to seek
gainful employment and most worked in the least
respected jobs in the informal, manufacturing and
service sectors, in domestic work and in entertainment.
Those were fields in which many serious human rights
violations occurred. Although women migrant workers
obviously made an important contribution to the
development of both their countries of origin and their
countries of destination, that contribution was not
always fully acknowledged, a fact that impacted on the
way they were regarded and treated. Women migrant
workers were vulnerable at all stages of the migration
process: in their countries of origin, where they could
be confined physically and sexually violated by
recruiting agents; during the trip, when they could be
abandoned or subjected to physical and sexual abuse;
in the country of destination, where many of them
faced employment discrimination or performed domestic
work where their privacy and well-being were not
always respected and where abuse was common; and
when they returned to their country of origin, where
relationships with their spouses and families were
sometimes difficult and where they faced possible
stigmatization in their communities. Furthermore,
globalization and its impact on the economy had often
exacerbated the exploitation of women migrant workers.
20. The draft resolution presented basic principles for
the protection of women migrant workers from abuse
and sought not only to raise awareness of those
women’s situation, but also to provide States with
guidance on how to prevent and eliminate various
forms of exploitation of women migrant workers.
21. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi,
Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
the Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Paraguay, Peru, Senegal, Sri
Lanka, Timor-Leste, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe
had become sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1: Intensification of
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women
22. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
23. Ms. Samson (Netherlands), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1 on behalf of the
sponsors, said that Argentina, Armenia, the Republic ofA/C.3/64/SR.34
5 09-58320
Moldova and Tanzania had become sponsors. The draft
resolution, which addressed primarily institutional
issues, focused on the efforts of organizations of the
United Nations system to eliminate violence against
women. Its sponsors urged States and other
stakeholders to increase their voluntary contributions
to the Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate
Violence against Women, in order to meet the annual
target of 100 million dollars by 2015. They welcomed
the establishment of the Secretary-General’s database
on violence against women and requested the support
of Member States and relevant United Nations entities.
24. At the informal consultations, there had been a
general preference that the draft resolution should
continue to focus on all forms of violence against
women. It had therefore been decided not to include
some of the proposed amendments, including the one
presented in document A/C.3/64/L.25*. She hoped that
the draft resolution would be adopted by consensus.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.25*: Intensification of
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women
25. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.
26. Mr. Hassan (Sudan), speaking on behalf of the
Group of Arab States, introduced the amendment to
draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1 contained in
document A/C.3/64/L.25* and recalled that the
wording of the draft amendment had previously been
agreed as contained in General Assembly resolution
63/155, adopted by the Third Committee. The Group
considered it necessary to refer specifically to
situations of armed conflict and foreign occupation,
which required close attention. Representatives of the
Group had participated in consultations organized by
the sponsors of draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1
and had proposed the draft amendment, which was not
reflected in the final draft and was thus, in their
opinion, incomplete.
27. Ms. Samson (Netherlands) said that her country
and France, as the main sponsors of draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1, regretted that a draft amendment
had been submitted. During the informal consultations,
which had been conducted in a transparent manner, the
Syrian Arab Republic’s proposed amendment,
contained in document A/C.3/64/L.25*, had been
discussed but not agreed upon. Document
A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1 was a draft resolution of a
procedural nature that focused on efforts of the United
Nations system to eliminate all forms of violence
against women and had been drafted on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 62/133 and of the report
of the Secretary-General (A/64/151), while Assembly
resolution 63/155 was addressed primarily to States.
The draft aimed to address all forms of violence
against women rather than one form in particular. The
Syrian proposal had not been accepted during the
informal consultations because it risked shifting the
balance of the text by highlighting only certain
circumstances in which violence against women
occurred rather than stressing that the United Nations
system should intensify its efforts to eliminate all
forms of violence against women. Since the Group of
Arab States had not joined the consensus, the
Netherlands and France called for a recorded vote on
the draft amendment contained in document
A/C.3/64/L.25* and would vote against it for the
reasons mentioned.
28. Ms. Phipps (United States of America), speaking
in explanation of vote before the voting, said that while
it was true that the text of the amendment introduced
by the Group of Arab States was agreed wording, draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1 focused on the efforts
of the United Nations system to combat violence
against women rather than on measures taken by
States. Her delegation, like other sponsors of the
resolution, would vote against inclusion of the
amendment introduced by the Group and contained in
document A/C.3/64/L.25*.
29. Mr. Pérez (Peru) said that his country
condemned all acts of violence against women. It stood
in solidarity with the victims and understood their
vulnerability in situations of armed conflict. However,
the objective of draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1
was to highlight advances made by the United Nations
system in eradicating all forms of violence against
women. Although Peru continued to support the
position taken in the amendment, it would vote against
draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.25*.
30. A recorded vote on the amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.25* was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of theA/C.3/64/SR.34
09-58320 6
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, the Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana,
Cape Verde, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominica,
Ethiopia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Jamaica,
Kenya, Liechtenstein, Maldives, Mali, Mexico,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Serbia, Sri Lanka,
Switzerland, Suriname, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, Zambia.
31. The proposed amendment contained in draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.25* was rejected by 60 votes to
52, with 40 abstentions.
32. Mr. Suárez (Colombia) said that his country had
voted against the amendment because, although it
contained agreed language, it had been clear during the
consultations that document A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1 was
a procedural resolution that focused on the work of the
United Nations system.
33. Ms. Ivanović (Serbia) said that as a sponsor of
draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1, her delegation
regretted that it had been necessary to submit a new
amendment. However, she recognized the importance
of the issue raised by the Group of Arab States, and, for
that reason, her delegation had abstained from voting
on the amendment.
34. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Austria, Bahamas,
Belize, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cape Verde, Cyprus,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Ethiopia,
Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, India, Israel, Jamaica, Mali,
Mexico, Monaco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Philippines, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Slovakia, Thailand, Timor-
Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, United States of
America, Uruguay and Zambia had become sponsors of
the draft resolution.
35. Ms. Sapag (Chile) said that draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1 was a priority for her delegation
and that, since the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 61/143, the United Nations system had made
many efforts to combat all forms of violence against
women. She thanked the bodies of the United Nations
system that were promoting initiatives in that area,
such as the Secretary-General’s database on violence
against women and the Say NO — UNiTE to End
Violence against Women campaign. The draft
resolution stressed the need to make voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund in Support of Actions
to Eliminate Violence against Women. The text was
well balanced since it addressed all forms of violence;
to draw such distinctions among them would lead to
failure.
36. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1 was
adopted.
37. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation had joined the consensus but was deeply
concerned about the refusal to insert a paragraph that
was already part of the draft resolution adopted the
previous year. It had introduced the amendment on
situations of armed conflict and foreign occupation on
behalf of the Group of Arab States in order to
emphasize that in certain difficult circumstances, it was
necessary to step up efforts in accordance with theA/C.3/64/SR.34
7 09-58320
Charter of the United Nations, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The sponsors of the draft resolution had turned a deaf
ear and had made weak arguments motivated by
personal interests, thereby hampering achievement of
the noble goal of eliminating all forms of violence
against women in all circumstances. To say that the
text was a procedural resolution on the work of the
United Nations system was far from the truth. In
addition, the amendment concerned the responsibility
of the United Nations, which applied also to occupied
territories.
38. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) said that while his
delegation understood the approach taken by the
sponsors of draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1, it
strongly supported the principles contained in the
proposed amendment (A/C.3/64/L.25*) and believed
that they should not have been rejected. The
elimination of violence against women was a priority
for his Government, which had a zero tolerance policy
in that regard. Although Malaysia had voted for the
proposed amendment contained in draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.25*, it supported draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1 as a whole and had joined the
consensus.
39. Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein), speaking also on
behalf of Andorra, Costa Rica and Switzerland, noted
that draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.16/Rev.1 concerned
United Nations efforts to eliminate violence against
women. The fight against impunity must be at the
centre of action by any United Nations agency
confronting violence against women in the field, for
impunity perpetuated the cycle of violence. The draft
resolution should therefore have reflected the
international community’s commitment to
accountability and to combating impunity, which were
essential elements of United Nations efforts. His
delegation had expected that the amendments it had
proposed during the informal consultations would be
incorporated into the draft resolution. Moreover, it had
urged that more time should be spent on consultations
and had suggested that the main sponsors should
postpone action. It was nonetheless gratified that the
draft resolution had been adopted without a vote and
hoped to be able to join the sponsors in 2010.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.