United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.50
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
14 December 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-60536 (E)
*0760536*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 50th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 20 November 2007, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and
representatives (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.50
07-60536 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/62/L.41/Rev.1, L.43 and L.83)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.41/Rev.1: Situation of
human rights in Myanmar
1. The Chairman, drawing attention to draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.41/Rev.1 and to the related
statement of budget implications in document
A/C.3/62/L.83, invited the Committee to take action on
the draft resolution.
2. Mr. Swe (Myanmar), speaking on a point of
order, said that draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.41/Rev.1
had no place in the Committee’s work. Therefore, in
accordance with rule 116 of the rules of procedure and
with the principles adopted at the Fourteenth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of the
Non-Aligned Countries, his delegation called for the
adjournment of the debate on the draft resolution.
3. The Chairman invited two representatives to
speak in favour of, and two against, the motion before
putting it to the vote in accordance with rule 116.
4. Ms. Zhang Dan (China), speaking in favour of
the no-action motion regarding the draft resolution,
said that China had always advocated the settlement of
differences on human-rights issues through dialogue
and cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual
respect. For many years, country-specific resolutions
had failed to protect human rights and had become
tools for political purposes. She recalled that General
Assembly resolution 60/251 had explicitly stated that
the promotion and protection of human rights should
respect the various historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds of nations and promote equal dialogue
and cooperation between countries. Furthermore, the
Human Rights Council had convened a special session
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar and
resolutions had been adopted. The Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar had also
visited that country and had achieved results.
5. The General Assembly should encourage the
momentum for dialogue that had been generated and
should refrain from any action on politically motivated
draft resolutions. A no-action motion did not stifle
dialogue on human-rights issues but rather was
intended to rid the Committee of double standards and
politicization. On the basis of the above, her delegation
called on all countries to support the no-action motion.
6. Mr. Jesus (Angola), speaking in favour of the no-
action motion, said that the Committee should be a
forum for dialogue, not criticism. The Human Rights
Council had adopted the universal periodic review,
which would provide objective and reliable
information on the fulfilment by Myanmar of its
human-rights obligations. Furthermore, his delegation
welcomed the decision taken by the Government of
Myanmar to permit the visit of the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar.
7. Mr. Michelsen (Norway), speaking against the
no-action motion, said that all texts submitted to the
Committee should be reviewed on their merits, and
delegations should be allowed to comment on them
without the use of procedural means to prevent action
on substance. Norway therefore opposed no-action
motions in principle. Furthermore, serious human-
rights situations merited consideration. The United
Nations, including the Committee, should remain a
forum for addressing such cases. While criticism
should be supplemented with dialogue and take into
account different national conditions and capabilities,
dialogue should not preclude criticism where
necessary.
8. Ms. Lowe (New Zealand), speaking against the
no-action motion, said that the General Assembly had a
mandate to consider human-rights situations. It had
passed resolutions expressing its collective concerns
about some of the worst human-rights situations for
more than thirty years. In many cases, such
international attention had helped to increase the
pressure on States, eventually helping them to become
strong promoters of human rights themselves. New
Zealand was committed to dialogue and cooperation in
situations where there was evidence of serious
violations of human rights. While resolutions should be
adopted only after negotiations with the countries
concerned and with the broadest consensus possible,
the Committee needed to address the serious questions
that had been raised in the draft resolution on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar. Her delegation
would therefore vote against the no-action motion and
hoped that others would do the same, particularly in
the light of current events.A/C.3/62/SR.50
3 07-60536
9. At the request of the representative of Myanmar, a
recorded vote was taken on the motion for the
adjournment of the debate on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.41/Rev.1.
In favour:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saudi Arabia, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Belize, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chad,
Colombia, Comoros, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ghana,
Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho,
Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Nepal,
Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Suriname, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu.
10. The motion for the adjournment of the debate on
draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.41/Rev.1 was rejected by 88
votes to 54, with 34 abstentions.*
11. Ms. Martins (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union and the other sponsors, announced
that Switzerland had joined the list of sponsors. She
also noted that the draft resolution contained a
typographical error: the word “towards” should be
deleted from the fifth line of paragraph 3 (g).
12. In the draft resolution, the international
community urgently appealed to the Government of
Myanmar to ensure full respect for the human rights of
its people. It was a cause for great concern that, despite
international efforts, the human-rights situation in
Myanmar had further deteriorated since the General
Assembly had last considered that issue. The whole
world had seen how the Government of Myanmar had
violently repressed peaceful demonstrations in
September 2007, killing and arbitrarily detaining a
large number of citizens who were exercising their
rights to freedom of opinion, expression, peaceful
assembly and association. The draft resolution called
upon the Government of Myanmar to exercise utmost
restraint, to desist from further arrests and violence,
and to release without delay those who had been
arrested and detained. It also called upon the
Government to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur in the implementation of the Human Rights
Council resolution, including by granting him access to
Myanmar.
13. The European Union believed in cooperation and
wished to encourage the Government of Myanmar to
continue to engage with the United Nations on the
human-rights situation and to discuss the restoration of
democracy. The draft resolution had therefore
welcomed the steps taken by the Government in that
regard and the European Union had requested the
Secretary-General to continue to provide his good
offices through his Special Adviser. The Government
of Myanmar should give serious consideration to the
* The delegation of Algeria subsequently informed the
Committee that it had intended to vote in favour of the
no-action motion.A/C.3/62/SR.50
07-60536 4
recommendations and proposals of the latter and
should cooperate fully with him with a view to
restoring democracy and protecting human rights in
Myanmar. There had been overwhelming support from
the international community for that approach, which
should be reflected in support for the draft resolution.
14. While efforts had been made to discuss the text of
the draft resolution with the delegation of Myanmar,
unfortunately it had not been possible to reach a
consensus. However, the General Assembly should not
remain silent. She therefore appealed to all delegations
to support the people of Myanmar by voting in favour
of the draft resolution.
15. Mr. Swe (Myanmar) said that the draft resolution
sponsored by the European Union would generate
confrontation instead of promoting cooperation. His
delegation found it objectionable on grounds of
procedure as well as substance. The proper forum for
country-specific resolutions was the Human Rights
Council. However, the current draft resolution made a
mockery of the principles that had led to the
establishment of the Council. Furthermore, the
European Union had once again submitted the draft
text to his delegation only three days before
introducing the draft resolution, thereby making
meaningful negotiations impossible. The real intention
of the draft resolution was to manipulate Myanmar’s
internal political process and to derail the seven-step
political road map that it had set for its transition to a
democratic society. The draft resolution was full of
unfounded allegations by exiles and remnants of the
insurgency, who were waging a systematic
disinformation campaign aided and funded by powerful
Western countries. The draft resolution was entirely
unacceptable to Myanmar because it interfered in
matters that, in accordance with the Charter, fell under
the sovereign domain of Myanmar.
16. The introduction of a country-specific draft
resolution on Myanmar at a time when its Government
was cooperating with the Secretary-General’s good
offices and with the Human Rights Council could
only be counter-productive. As evidence of such
cooperation, he noted that the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General for Myanmar had visited Myanmar
twice in recent months and that the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar had
successfully completed his visit in November. In his
most recent report, the Special Adviser had noted the
positive outcomes of his mission and had reiterated
that the good-offices role required time, patience,
persistence and a comprehensive approach. Moreover,
peace and stability had been restored and life had
returned to normal in Myanmar. Almost all of those
detained in connection with the unrest in September
had been released. Only 91 persons found to have been
involved in a conspiracy to commit acts of terrorism
remained in detention and action would be taken
against them in accordance with the law.
17. The first crucial step of the road map, the
National Convention, had successfully completed the
task of laying down the basic principles to be enshrined
in a new constitution. A 54-member committee had
been established to draft a new constitution. A minister
had also been appointed to liaise with Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi, who had stated that the Government was
serious about working towards national reconciliation.
Given the complex and delicate challenges facing
Myanmar, the good-offices role should be allowed time
and space to facilitate national reconciliation.
18. The European Union’s country-specific draft
resolution was anathema to the work of the Committee
and ignored the positive developments in Myanmar. It
was clearly an attempt to put political pressure on
Myanmar under the pretext of promoting human rights
and, if left unchallenged, would set a dangerous
precedent for developing countries. His delegation was
therefore compelled to request a recorded vote. It
appealed to all countries to show solidarity with
Myanmar and to vote against the draft resolution, in
line with the principled stance taken by the Heads of
State or Government of the Non-Aligned Movement.
19. Mr. Jang Hun (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that the European Union had been
interfering in the internal affairs of Myanmar for
several years by putting forward country-specific
resolutions on the situation of human rights in that
country. His delegation firmly believed that human
rights could not be imposed from outside and that
country-specific resolutions only undermined trust
among potential partners and politicized the United
Nations human-rights machinery. Only through
dialogue, cooperation and engagement would human
rights be advanced locally and globally. In that light,
and in line with the position of the Movement of Non-
Aligned Countries, his delegation would vote against
the draft resolution.A/C.3/62/SR.50
5 07-60536
20. Mr. Shigabutdinov (Uzbekistan), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that his
delegation was firmly convinced that country-specific
resolutions on human rights complicated international
cooperation on human rights. Such resolutions
undermined trust and harmed the work of the United
Nations in the area of human rights. The best way to
strengthen human rights was a constructive dialogue
and respectful cooperation among Member States by
discussing human-rights issues within the framework
of the Human Rights Council. The United Nations
should focus its attention on searching for a joint
solution to problems, particularly within the field of
human rights. Any attempt to exploit human rights for
political purposes was counter-productive. His
delegation would therefore vote against the draft
resolution.
21. Mr. Pramudwinai (Thailand) said that Thailand
wished to see a peaceful and stable Myanmar,
particularly as it shared a 2,400-km border with that
country. The violent incidents which had occurred in
Myanmar in September were indeed tragic. However,
the overall situation had improved and the Government
of Myanmar had taken steps to address the remaining
challenges.
22. Thailand had consistently expressed its full
support for the good offices of the Secretary-General
through his Special Adviser for Myanmar. It fully
agreed that the process would require an element of
trust as well as patience and perseverance. It also
agreed with the Special Adviser’s comprehensive
approach and his view that the good offices should
yield tangible results. His delegation also welcomed
the recent visit by the Special Rapporteur to Myanmar.
23. The international community should support the
good-offices process, which could pave the way
towards national reconciliation. While the future of
Myanmar was in the hands of its people, Thailand was
ready to continue to work with its regional and other
partners to support the momentum towards national
reconciliation. His delegation hoped that a substantive,
broad-based and time-bound dialogue including all
relevant parties would begin shortly. Constructive
dialogue and cooperation were the most effective
means of advancing human rights. Such an approach
was all the more vital as Myanmar entered the crucial
but fragile stage of national reconciliation. In the light
of the above, his delegation would abstain from voting
on the draft resolution.
24. Ms. Rodríguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that her delegation would vote against
the draft resolution, since it opposed the selective
practice employed by some countries of introducing
draft resolutions which directly targeted sovereign
States, thereby violating the principle of respect for
sovereignty and non-interference in their internal
affairs. The repeated use of such draft resolutions,
which were instruments used to promote narrow
political interests, was unwelcome, inconsistent and
unlawful. Moreover, that approach did not serve the
genuine interests of anyone or benefit the victims of
human-rights violations. The promotion and protection
of human rights should be based on cooperation and
respectful dialogue between the Members of the United
Nations with a view to strengthening the capacity of
States to comply with their human-rights obligations.
25. Mr. Degia (Barbados) said that his delegation
had hoped that the establishment of the Human Rights
Council would usher in a new era of dialogue,
cooperation, non-selectivity, non-politicization and
genuine concern for human rights. However, the events
of the current and previous sessions of the General
Assembly had made it clear that such hopes had been
unfounded. It was disappointing that the Council had
not been afforded any real opportunity to establish
itself and that a confrontational approach had persisted.
26. As a country with a paradoxical history of slavery
and colonialism alongside a tradition of parliamentary
democracy going back more than 300 years, Barbados
attached the highest importance to the issue of human
rights and democracy in both its domestic and its
foreign policy. His delegation was therefore deeply
concerned at the highly political and divisive nature of
the human-rights debate in the Committee, particularly
concerning country-specific resolutions. The specific
targeting of certain countries was not helpful or
productive. The principled and consistent position of
Barbados with respect to country-specific resolutions
had led it in the past either to abstain or to support no-
action motions. However, such voting should not be
misconstrued as a lack of concern for human rights;
rather it was based on the principle of not singling out
certain countries for condemnation. Barbados was
gravely concerned about human-rights abuses in many
parts of the world, including Myanmar, and urged all
States to cooperate and to engage in dialogue in order
to address such concerns. His delegation therefore
called on the authorities in Myanmar to cooperate fullyA/C.3/62/SR.50
07-60536 6
with the United Nations and regional bodies as part of
a sincere effort to improve the situation on the ground.
27. Mr. Strigelsky (Belarus) said that his delegation
consistently opposed country-specific, politicized
resolutions and was convinced that the situation of
human rights should be dealt with by the Human
Rights Council, which had all the necessary
mechanisms to conduct an independent, impartial and
expert analysis of compliance by countries with their
human-rights obligations. All States should be held
accountable for human-rights violations. However, a
study of the extent of respect for human rights should
be undertaken in a civilized manner on a
comprehensive basis and should not impose the views
of an individual group of countries. His delegation
believed that country-specific resolutions, by their very
nature, did not provide a balanced view of the human-
rights situation in a particular country. Alternative
views existed on such sensitive issues and they should
be taken into account. For those reasons, his delegation
would vote against the draft resolution.
28. Ms. Gendi (Egypt) said that her delegation firmly
opposed country-specific draft resolutions, which
politicized human-rights issues. The Human Rights
Council should consider the situations of human rights
in all countries, in accordance with its universal
periodic review. Only that approach would remove
selectivity and help strengthen solidarity in order to
tackle the underlying causes of human-rights
violations. Her delegation would therefore vote against
the draft resolution.
29. Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia) said that his country
would vote against the draft resolution, in line with its
position of principle against country-specific
resolutions. Malaysia preferred a constructive approach
of genuine dialogue and cooperation, which did not
mean, however, that it condoned gross violations of
human rights, including the use of force against
justified civilian protests. There had also been positive
developments in Myanmar, including the cooperation
extended to the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser for
Myanmar, Mr. Gambari, and the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Myanmar, Mr. Pinheiro.
The Government should engage all stakeholders in
dialogue in order to find a peaceful solution.
30. Mr. Saeed (Sudan) said that his country’s
position of principle on country-specific draft
resolutions on human rights remained unchanged. Such
resolutions did not help Member States to achieve the
goal of protecting human rights but were a mechanism
for achieving political objectives and served the
interests of the sponsor countries. Member States
should strengthen the role of the Human Rights
Council, which had opened a new stage in the area of
human rights on the basis of impartiality, dialogue and
cooperation and had established special mechanisms to
review human rights in all countries.
31. In view of its position of principle, his delegation
would not comment on the text of the draft resolution
and would vote against it, as such a resolution could
only harm the negotiations between Myanmar and the
Special Adviser.
32. At the request of the representative of Myanmar, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.41/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Against:
Algeria, Bangladesh, Belarus, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Russian
Federation, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,A/C.3/62/SR.50
7 07-60536
Uganda, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chad, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guinea,
Haiti, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Papua New
Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, United Arab
Emirates, Yemen, Zambia.
33. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.41/Rev.1 was adopted
by 88 to 24, with 66 abstentions.
34. Mr. Kunwar S. Singh (India) said that his
country had always emphasized the importance of
promoting and protecting human rights through
dialogue, consultation and cooperation. The Committee
should reflect on whether the international community
had ever managed to effect genuine improvement in
human rights by giving report cards or by undertaking
intrusive monitoring.
35. In connection with the recent developments in
Myanmar, any new initiatives should be forward-
looking and non-condemnatory and should seek to
engage the Government in a non-intrusive and
constructive manner, thereby supporting the Secretary-
General’s good offices and the ongoing dialogue
between his Special Adviser and the Government of
Myanmar. The process of political reform and national
reconciliation should be taken forward expeditiously
and should include all sections of society. His country
therefore supported the Secretary-General’s initiative
for moving that process forward in an integrated and
comprehensive manner.
36. The condemnatory, intrusive and unhelpful tone
of the draft resolution, however, could prove
counterproductive. It did not reflect the positive steps
taken by the Government of Myanmar, including the
visit to Myanmar of the Special Rapporteur,
Mr. Pinheiro, and the series of meetings between
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and the specially appointed
liaison minister. His delegation had therefore had no
option but to vote against the draft resolution.
37. Mr. Anshor (Indonesia) said that the good offices
of the Secretary-General, through his Special Adviser,
emanated from a General Assembly resolution. Those
efforts were supported by Indonesia and, more
significantly, by Myanmar itself. His delegation’s
rejection of the proposal to adjourn the debate should
be seen in that context.
38. His delegation had abstained from voting on the
draft resolution because insufficient effort had been
made to reach a consensus. Both the Human Rights
Council, in its resolution S-5/1, and the Security
Council, in the presidential statement of 11 October
2007, had been able to address the situation in
Myanmar by consensus. Indonesia attached great
importance to the unity of the international community
and its support for Myanmar’s efforts to promote
national dialogue and reconciliation as part of a
peaceful transition to democracy.
39. A consensus resolution on the human-rights
situation in Myanmar would have sent a strong
message of support for that country to pursue its efforts
in the field of human rights. The Committee could have
built on the consensus texts adopted at the most recent
special session of the Human Rights Council on
Myanmar and the presidential statement of the Security
Council on the same issue, rather than relying
excessively on the previous year’s General Assembly
resolution on Myanmar.
40. His delegation supported significant aspects of
the draft resolution, including the reaffirmation of
Human Rights Council resolution S-5/1, support for the
presidential statement issued by the Security Council
on 11 October 2007 and acknowledgement of the steps
taken by the Government of Myanmar in engaging the
good offices of the Secretary-General. As a fellow
member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), Indonesia would continue to support
Myanmar’s peaceful transition to democracy. His
delegation had not voted in favour of the draft
resolution, in view of the lack of consensus between
the sponsors and Myanmar.
41. Mr. Cheok (Singapore) said that his delegation
had abstained from voting because the General
Assembly was not the appropriate forum for country-A/C.3/62/SR.50
07-60536 8
specific human-rights resolutions. By their very nature,
such resolutions were divisive, making it difficult for
Member States to work together in a constructive way.
It would be more appropriate for the present issue to be
taken up by the Human Rights Council.
42. Singapore had been troubled by the recent events
in Myanmar and, in its capacity as Chair of ASEAN,
had recently issued a strong statement expressing
concern at the suppression by force of peaceful
demonstrations in Myanmar. The statement called on
the authorities of Myanmar to exercise restraint and to
release all political detainees, including Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi. Singapore and other ASEAN countries had
continued to call on the various parties in Myanmar to
work towards national reconciliation and a peaceful
transition to democracy. ASEAN also continued to
support the good offices of the Secretary-General
through his Special Adviser.
43. The situation in Myanmar was extremely
complex and despite the superficial appearance of
calm, disturbing reports of arbitrary arrests continued.
Singapore called for the release of those detained
during the recent protests and was disappointed by the
decision of the Government of Myanmar to terminate
the assignment of the United Nations Development
Programme Resident Coordinator. That action sent the
wrong signal about its commitment and willingness to
work on those crucial issues with the United Nations.
44. There had also been positive developments,
including two visits to Myanmar by the Special
Adviser, Mr. Gambari, in a short space of time and a
visit by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Myanmar after a four-year interval. A
minister had been appointed for liaison between
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and the Government, and she
had recently met officials of the National League for
Democracy. She had made a statement through
Mr. Gambari expressing her commitment to dialogue
with the regime and her support for the good offices of
the United Nations. Those developments should set the
stage for an inclusive and genuine dialogue.
45. The leaders of ASEAN had recently decided to
respect Myanmar’s preference to deal directly with the
United Nations and the international community. In
that regard, paragraph 3 (g) of the draft resolution did
not reflect the most recent developments. It was
important that the international community should
continue to extend its full support to the good offices
of the Secretary-General, represented by his Special
Adviser. Political dialogue for national reconciliation
would take time, and the draft resolution just adopted
would not necessarily be helpful to that process.
Delegations should focus their energies on supporting
Mr. Gambari and encouraging all parties to engage in a
serious and meaningful dialogue.
46. Ms. Abdelhak (Algeria) said that her delegation
had voted against the draft resolution in order to
express its opposition to the confrontational approach
of submitting a country-specific resolution. Only a
cooperative approach based on dialogue could support
human rights in Myanmar. The periodic review adopted
by the Human Rights Council and recently approved
by the Committee in the context of institution-building
for the Human Rights Council was the appropriate way
to consider the human-rights situation in individual
countries. The aim was to improve the performance of
States in relation to human rights rather than to
stigmatize them.
47. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) said that his
delegation, in accordance with its position of principle
against double standards and selectivity in human
rights, had voted against the draft resolution. Cuba
opposed all attempts to use human-rights matters as a
tool for political purposes. The Committee should be a
forum for dialogue and cooperation and not made into
an inquisitorial tribunal against third-world countries.
48. Mr. Islam (Bangladesh) said that his delegation
had been following the developments in Myanmar very
closely and extended its full support for the initiative
of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General. It was
also encouraging that Aung San Suu Kyi was ready to
pursue constructive dialogue with the Government and
had welcomed the good offices of the United Nations.
Myanmar should remain constructively engaged in that
process. As a neighbouring country, Bangladesh was
ready to extend support if required and had taken note
of the recent visit to Myanmar of the Special
Rapporteur. Despite all those developments, the recently
adopted draft resolution could be counterproductive at
that critical juncture. His delegation had therefore been
constrained to vote against it.
49. Mr. Chuasoto (Philippines) said that his
delegation had abstained from voting because it
acknowledged the positive outcome of Mr. Gambari’s
recent visit to Myanmar. His delegation fully supported
the good-offices mission of the Secretary-General,A/C.3/62/SR.50
9 07-60536
represented by Mr. Gambari, and espoused a broader
role for the United Nations on the Myanmar issue in
order to promote national reconciliation and
democratization.
50. His delegation hoped that all the efforts in the
region and in the United Nations would soon produce
tangible outcomes leading to national reconciliation
and a peaceful transition to democracy in Myanmar. At
the recent ASEAN Summit, the President of Singapore
had called for the early and safe release of Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi and political prisoners, the full and free
participation of political parties, including the NDL, in
the political process and a return to democracy in
Myanmar. His delegation would remain attentive to the
situation and looked forward to seeing how it would
evolve.
51. Mr. Shinyo (Japan) said that his country had
voted in favour of the draft resolution in the hope that
the international community was sending a message
that would promote further improvements. Japan was
concerned about the human-rights situation and
democratization in Myanmar and deeply deplored the
use of force by the authorities against peaceful
demonstrators, which had resulted in heavy casualties.
It was also concerned about the detention of Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi and other political prisoners.
52. Japan welcomed the positive developments that
had taken place. The Government of Myanmar had
accepted two visits from the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General and also one by the Special
Rapporteur, after four years of denying him access. The
Government had also appointed a minister for liaison
with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, and three meetings with
her had already been held.
53. He hoped that the Government of Myanmar
would take serious steps to improve the situation with
regard to democratization and human rights, taking
into account the wishes expressed by the people of
Myanmar. Japan would continue to engage in dialogue
with Myanmar and fully supported the ongoing good
offices of the Secretary-General, including the efforts
of his Special Adviser. It was important that the
Government of Myanmar should cooperate with the
United Nations to improve the situation.
54. Mr. Pham Hai Anh (Viet Nam) said that his
delegation had voted against the draft resolution. Viet
Nam was following closely the recent developments in
Myanmar and hoped that restraint would be exercised
and differences resolved peaceably through dialogue
by the parties concerned in Myanmar. His delegation
continued to support implementation of the seven-point
road map and cooperation between the United Nations
and the Government. They should work together to
contribute to national reconciliation and harmonization
in the long-term interests of Myanmar and the region.
Viet Nam encouraged dialogue and cooperation to
promote and protect human rights as stipulated in
General Assembly resolution 60/251 establishing the
Human Rights Council.
55. Mr. Moreira (Brazil) had voted in favour of the
draft resolution. The Government of Brazil had
participated in the special session of the Human Rights
Council devoted to the situation of human rights in
Myanmar. The adoption by consensus of Human Rights
Council resolution S-5/1 had initiated a process of
fostering dialogue between that country and the United
Nations human-rights mechanisms. The visit to
Myanmar of the Special Adviser, as well as the recent
decision by the Government of Myanmar to accept a
visit from the Special Rapporteur after a four-year
interval, were encouraging. However, it was still
necessary to shed further light on the human rights
situation. The authorities of Myanmar should intensify
their cooperation with both envoys with a view to
improving that situation. Brazil encouraged the
Government of Myanmar to take full advantage of that
process and to continue cooperation and dialogue with
the mechanisms of the Human Rights Council.
56. Mr. Swe (Myanmar) said that the results of the
voting reflected the divisive nature of country-specific
resolutions. His delegation was not surprised or
discouraged by the result of the vote: despite the power
of block voting and the tremendous pressures exerted
on a number of developing countries, the sponsors did
not have a convincing majority. It was a clear message
that exploitation of human rights for political purposes
was unacceptable to Myanmar and to many other
countries. At a time when its domestic political process
had made significant strides, Myanmar could not allow
a blatant attempt at interference in that process. His
country was on track for a smooth transition to
democracy and was determined to proceed with the
seven-step political process. As the Human Rights
Council had established its mechanism for universal
periodic review, Member States with genuine concern
for human rights should oppose any country-specific
resolution that selectively targeted developingA/C.3/62/SR.50
07-60536 10
countries. Myanmar firmly opposed any politicization
of human rights and therefore dissociated itself from
the draft resolution and would not be bound by its
provisions. In conformity with its foreign policy,
Myanmar would continue to cooperate with the United
Nations and with the good offices of the Secretary-
General. He thanked the many delegations that, despite
the pressure exerted on them, had taken a position of
principle and stood in solidarity with Myanmar.
57. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) said that his country had
on various occasions expressed its serious concern
about the human-rights situation in Myanmar. Freedom
of expression had to be respected and protected,
peaceful demonstrators and political prisoners should
be released and humanitarian organizations should be
guaranteed access to persons in need. The actions of
the Government of Myanmar should reflect its
willingness to cooperate with the United Nations and
to improve the humanitarian and human-rights
situation.
58. Switzerland welcomed the invitation extended by
the authorities to the Special Rapporteur to visit
Myanmar in accordance with his mandate. It
considered that visit a first stage in substantial
collaboration with the Special Rapporteur.
59. His country, which had supported the draft
resolution, welcomed the references made to the
Human Rights Council in various parts of the text. In
fact, by virtue of General Assembly resolution 60/251,
the treatment of human-rights situations in specific
countries was mainly a matter for the Human Rights
Council. That organ had the relevant mandate and
function. On a number of occasions, the Council had
responded rapidly and efficiently under that mandate,
as in the case of the recent special sessions on specific
countries. As it was the Council’s task to deal with
such situations, any country-specific resolution on
human rights that was submitted to the Committee in
the future should contain a reference to the relevant
instruments of the Human Rights Council.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.43: Situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
60. Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran),
speaking on a point of order, moved the adjournment of
the debate on draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.43 in
accordance with rule 116 of the rules of procedure. The
Human Rights Council, acting through its universal
periodic review, was the body most competent to
monitor human rights. Consideration of the draft
resolution should therefore be excluded from the work
of the Committee.
61. The Chairman invited two representatives to
speak in favour of, and two against, the motion, before
putting it to the vote, in accordance with rule 116.
62. Mr. Hayee (Pakistan), speaking in favour of the
motion, said that human-rights issues should be
addressed in a spirit of fairness and cooperation, not
exclusion and confrontation created by country-
specific resolutions, which did not promote human
rights but alienated Governments, tended to overlook
their efforts and created artificial barriers to
constructive dialogue between the Member States and
the human-rights bodies. The Committee should refrain
from criticizing selected developing countries.
63. Ms. Rodríguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that her country supported the motion
because the selective politicization of human rights and
the use of double standards were at odds with the
Charter and the mechanism for the universal periodic
review. The promotion of human rights required
international cooperation and dialogue.
64. Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein), speaking against the
motion, said that the Committee dealt with human
rights in specific countries, and Iran’s human rights
had long been under international scrutiny. As a rule,
his Government strongly favoured dialogue. If
approved, the motion would deprive Liechtenstein and
other small countries of a rare opportunity to express
their opinion on the Islamic Republic of Iran. During
negotiations, his country had proposed a division of
labour between the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council. Unlike other thematic resolutions
considered by the Committee, the proposed text had no
counterpart before the Council. Diversity of opinion
enriched dialogue and his delegation was keenly
interested in the views of other Governments.
65. Mr. Normandin (Canada) said that his
delegation opposed the motion because the Committee
was a universal body that could recommend action on
human-rights issues. The motion would deny Member
States the right to discuss human-rights violations.
Country-specific human-rights resolutions should be
considered on their merits. The Committee had already
voted on two such draft resolutions on that basis.A/C.3/62/SR.50
11 07-60536
66. A recorded vote was taken on the motion for the
adjournment of the debate on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.43.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Chad, China,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Gabon, Gambia,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger,
Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Belize, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cape
Verde, Colombia, Dominica, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Solomon Islands,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu.
67. The motion for the adjournment of the debate on
draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.43 was rejected by 79 votes
to 78, with 24 abstentions.
68. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) read out
a number of technical corrections that had been made
at the time of introduction of the draft resolution.
69. Mr. Normandin (Canada), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.43 on behalf of the original
sponsors and Fiji and Iceland, said that there has been
a continued deterioration in the protection of the
human rights of the people of the Islamic Republic of
Iran in accordance with that country’s international
obligations. Until the day when that country’s
Government acknowledged that it faced human-rights
issues and when Iranian citizens would be able to
address those issues without fear of persecution, the
Committee remained a key avenue for the international
community to encourage positive change. The draft
resolution could engender respect for human rights in
the Islamic Republic of Iran.
70. The draft resolution was meant to accurately
reflect the facts. It referred to a marked deterioration
with regard to respect for human rights, including
confirmed instances of stoning as a method of
execution, increased use of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, such as
amputations and floggings, and the systematic
persecution of human-rights defenders. The Special
Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions had focused on the situation in the Islamic
Republic of Iran, pointing out that mass executions and
other unacceptable forms of capital punishment were
on the increase. Five days earlier, Iran had executed a
young man for a crime that he had committed at the
age of 16. The Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran should be held accountable for the continued
violation of the human rights of its citizens.
71. Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
some States systematically abused the human-rights
mechanisms of the United Nations in order to pursue
their own political objectives. Draft resolutionA/C.3/62/SR.50
07-60536 12
A/C.3/62/L.43 contained flawed information and
unfounded allegations. For instance, it claimed that no
special-procedure visit to the Islamic Republic of Iran
had been allowed by the Iranian Government since July
2005, while actually it had voluntarily extended in
2002 a standing invitation to all special-procedure
mandate holders, six of whom had visited the country.
In fact, the level of cooperation between the United
Nations special-procedure mechanisms and his country
ranked among the highest. Other examples of
inaccuracy abounded.
72. Although the Government of Canada pretended to
be a leading global human-rights advocate, minorities,
immigrants, foreigners and indigenous people in
Canada suffered human-rights violations that had been
documented by United Nations human-rights
monitoring bodies. Social exclusion and racial
discrimination had engendered significant disparities in
employment, health and education. At the international
level, Canada’s record in dealing with human-rights
violations was indefensible. Against the overwhelming
majority of Member States, Canada had opposed the
General Assembly and Human Rights Council
resolutions condemning Israel’s systematic violation of
the human rights of Palestinians. During Israel’s 2006
aggression against Lebanon, Canada had openly
supported Israeli brutality. In September 2007, Canada
had voted against the United Nations Declaration on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. In view of the
appalling conditions in the Guantánamo Bay facility
and in Iraqi prisons or the existence of secret detention
centres in various parts of Europe, other sponsors of
the draft resolution had no more reason to be proud of
their own human-rights record.
73. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, reaffirmed her
country’s opposition to any attempt by a State to
intervene in the affairs of another under the pretext of
human-rights protection. The sovereignty of all
Member States was enshrined in the Charter. The
promotion of human rights required responsible
dialogue based on mutual respect for national
sovereignty, territorial integrity and regional and
national characteristics. Human-rights issues should be
considered by the Human Rights Council, not by the
Committee. Politically motivated country-specific
resolutions, based on double standards, undermined a
consensus regarding human-rights issues.
74. Mr. Rachkov (Belarus) stressed that the Islamic
Republic of Iran had a very long history. The draft
resolution contained arrogant and unfounded criticism
based on disingenuous motives. The sponsors’ real
target was that State’s independent foreign policy.
75. Mr. Hayee (Pakistan), speaking on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), said
that, in October 2007, OIC opposed the submission of
country-specific resolutions on human-rights situations
selectively targeting developing and Islamic countries,
a practice which turned the work of human-rights
bodies into an extremely political exercise rather than
advancing the cause of human rights.
76. Mr. Saeed (Sudan) endorsed the statement made
by Pakistan on behalf of OIC and reaffirmed his
country’s position of principle against country-specific
resolutions. No country, regardless of size or power,
could claim to be free of human-rights problems. That
applied also to those countries which, proclaiming
themselves defenders of human rights, adopted such
resolutions as a political tool to interfere in other
countries’ internal affairs, contrary to the Charter. Such
double standards had led to the abolition of the
Commission on Human Rights and its replacement by
the Human Rights Council. The universal periodic
review established by the Human Rights Council was
the appropriate forum for examining such issues. Draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.43 was an attempt to reactivate
the practices of the former Commission, contrary to the
spirit of cooperation and impartiality of the Human
Rights Council. Sudan would therefore vote against the
draft resolution.
77. Ms. Gendi (Egypt) said that her country rejected
any draft resolution that was based on selectivity and
double standards or that sought to politicize human-
rights issues. In common with States members of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, it therefore
voted against all draft resolutions on human-rights
situations in specific countries.
78. First, it was deeply convinced that human rights
should be addressed on a cooperative basis through
capacity-building, rather than on a confrontational
basis involving the public exposure of human-rights
records in accordance with the wishes of self-appointed
watchdogs, without the backing of international law or
relevant United Nations resolutions.A/C.3/62/SR.50
13 07-60536
79. Secondly, human-rights issues should be dealt
with through the Human Rights Council and the
periodic-review mechanisms established for that
purpose, all of which should be given every
opportunity to fulfil their role of evaluating human-
rights situations worldwide, without regard to the
economic status of the countries concerned and to
political considerations.
80. Lastly, in making those evaluations, the factors of
civilization, culture, religion, demography and
ethnicity should be taken into account; such factors
were intrinsic to the human diversity that brought
communities together and should not be used to impose
alien standards in the misguided view that they were
instead factors of difference that set apart the countries
which annually submitted such draft resolutions. For
those reasons, Egypt would vote against the draft
resolution.
81. Ms. Rodríguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that her delegation would vote against
draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.43 out of a deep conviction
that the selective tendency shown by certain countries
for purely political motives to present draft resolutions
directed against a specific sovereign State violated the
universal principles of sovereignty and non-
interference in internal affairs. Draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.43 was an instrument to promote changes
in the political, economic and social system of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, part of an undesirable and
inconsistent practice which pursued no legitimate
interest and offered no real benefit. Countries should
promote human rights through constructive dialogue
and international cooperation, in keeping with the
Charter and with the Declaration on Principles of
International Law in General Assembly resolution
2625 (XXV), in a spirit of respect, mutual acceptance
and good faith, with a view to strengthening the
capacity of States to fulfil their obligations for the
benefit of all human beings.
82. Mr. Sergiwa ( Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that,
in discussing human rights, country-specific resolutions
pursued by one country to settle accounts with another
caused confrontation and hampered the solution of
human-rights situations. Such selectivity and double
standards should give way to fair, transparent and
respectful dialogue in order to promote international
cooperation. The Human Rights Council, especially the
consensus-based procedure for universal periodic
review, free from selectivity and politicization, was the
appropriate forum in which to discuss human rights in
all countries. The specificities of cultures and
civilizations should also be taken into account.
Consequently, his delegation would vote against draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.43.
83. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.43.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Vanuatu.
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Egypt, Gambia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chad, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea,A/C.3/62/SR.50
07-60536 14
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Suriname, Swaziland,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Zambia.
84. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.43 was adopted by 72
to 50, with 55 abstentions.
85. Ms. Abdelhak (Algeria) said that the procedure
for universal periodic review adopted by the Human
Rights Council was the appropriate mechanism to
examine country human-rights situations. Such a
mechanism should help States to improve their human-
rights performance, not stigmatize States or create
confrontation, such as the one elicited by the draft
resolution just adopted, which her delegation had voted
against.
86. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) said that his
delegation reaffirmed its opposition to selectivity and
double standards in regard to human rights, and to the
exploitation of human rights for political purposes or
domination. The draft resolution just adopted was of
that kind and his delegation had voted against it. The
Committee was not a tribunal sitting in judgement over
countries of the third world. The forum where such
issues should be aired was the Human Rights Council.
87. Mr. Ashiki (Japan) said his delegation had voted
in favour of the draft resolution because further
improvement was needed in the human-rights situation
in the Islamic Republic of Iran, but Japan welcomed
the efforts the Government had made towards such
improvement. In July 2007 in Tokyo, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Japan had engaged in the fourth
Japan-Iran human-rights dialogue, which his
Government believed contributed to the promotion and
protection of human rights. Japan likewise welcomed
Iran’s accession to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. Japan would
continue supporting Iran’s self-help efforts to improve
its human-rights situation.
88. Ms. Maierá (Brazil) said that, although her
delegation had abstained from voting, her country
noted with concern the human-rights situation in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, particularly with regard to
freedom of expression and opinion, violence and
discrimination against women, and the application of
cruel forms of punishment. Particularly disquieting was
the reported application of the death penalty to persons
under the age of 18, and discrimination against the
Bahá’í community, including arbitrary detentions,
imprisonment based on matters of conscience,
restrictions on the right to work and education, and
destruction of that community’s cultural legacy.
89. Brazil strongly supported consolidation of the
Human Rights Council as the main United Nations
body to promote and protect human rights by creating
an enabling environment to address human-rights
situations in a spirit of genuine cooperation and
dialogue. Brazil expected the Iranian Government to
strengthen its dialogue with the Human Rights Council
and all other United Nations human-rights mechanisms
in line with the standing invitation offered to all
Human Rights Council special procedures and Iran’s
ratification of the International Covenants on Civil and
Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
90. Ms. Tavares (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, the candidate countries Croatia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
stabilization and association process country
Montenegro, and, in addition, Moldova, said that the
European Union had voted for draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.43 because all countries should be held
accountable for fulfilling their obligations, and the
international community could not remain silent in the
face of continuous, grave and widespread human-rights
violations when the countries in question showed no
willingness to address the situations or engage in
meaningful dialogue.
91. Iranians continued to suffer systematic violations
of human rights, and the Government had failed to
implement steps called for in previous resolutions on
human rights in the country. No special procedure had
been able to arrange for a visit to the country since July
2005 and the Government had not implemented the
recommendations arising from previous visits. The
deterioration of the situation over the previous year
was well documented. Systematic violations included
the use of torture and other cruel or degrading
treatment or punishment; public executions, collectiveA/C.3/62/SR.50
15 07-60536
executions and other executions performed without
internationally recognized safeguards, including
executions by stoning and execution of juvenile
offenders; persistent violations of the human rights of
women and of persons belonging to religious, ethnic,
linguistic or other minorities; a campaign against
women’s-rights defenders; and violations of the
freedoms of expression, assembly and opinion, and of
due process. There was also continued discrimination
on the basis of sexual orientation.
92. The European Union urged Iran to promote and
protect the human rights of all its citizens regardless of
sex, gender, religion, ethnicity, belief and sexual
orientation, and hoped that the adoption of the draft
resolution and the implementation of the
recommendations it contained would open the way to
cooperation and contribute to the full enjoyment of all
human rights by all Iranians.
93. Mr. O’Reilly (United Kingdom), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, and responding to
remarks made at the preceding meeting by the
representative of Argentina concerning the Falkland
Islands, said that the United Kingdom’s position was
well known and had been set out in detail by the
United Kingdom’s Permanent Representative to the
United Nations, Sir John Sawers, on 1 October 2007 in
a written right of reply in response to the statement by
President Néstor Carlos Kircher of Argentina in a high-
level plenary meeting of the General Assembly. The
United Kingdom had no doubts about its sovereignty
over the Falkland Islands, a position based on the
principle of self-determination. It firmly believed that
the islanders had the right to determine their own
future. There could be no negotiations on the
sovereignty of the Falkland Islands unless and until
such time as the islanders so wished.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.