United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.51
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
13 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-64842 (E)
*1064842*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 51st meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 23 November 2010, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 61: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 67: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 106: International drug control (continued)
Agenda item 105: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)A/C.3/65/SR.51
10-64842 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 61: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.56: Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa
1. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution had no programme budget
implications.
2. Ms. Sulimani (Sierra Leone), speaking on behalf
of the Group of African States, said that Belgium,
Canada, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Mexico, Spain and
Serbia had joined the sponsors. The increase in
budgetary allocations to provide assistance to refugees,
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/65/324) was an indication of the collective will to
combat refugee crises in Africa. The Kampala
Convention was hailed as a landmark achievement with
the potential to change the lives of internally displaced
persons and refugees for the better. Her delegation
reiterated the call in the text for the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
continue providing support so that countries could
address the challenges they faced.
3. She read out a number of oral revisions to the
text. In the third preambular paragraph, the words “and
in this regard acknowledging the importance of
preventing and responding to sexual and gender based
violence” should be inserted after the word “abuse”.
The fourth preambular paragraph should be deleted and
replaced with the clause “Acknowledging the efforts of
member States, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and other stakeholders in improving the
situation of refugees and expressing grave concerns
over the deteriorating living conditions in many
refugee camps in Africa,”. In the sixth preambular
paragraph, the words “and the ongoing ratification
process” should be added after the word “adoption”. In
the seventh preambular paragraph, after the word
“appreciation”, the words “the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region 2006” should
be added. Finally, in paragraph 8, the words from the
phrase “at its sixty-first session of its” to the end of the
paragraph should be deleted and replaced with the
words: “of the conclusion on protracted refugee
situations at the extraordinary meeting held on
8 December 2009 at its sixty-first session, as well as
the conclusion on refugees with disabilities and other
persons with disabilities protected and assisted by
UNHCR at its sixty-first session held from 4 to
8 October 2010”.
4. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Belize,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, France, Germany,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Japan, Latvia, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Norway, Poland, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America had joined the sponsors.
5. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.56, as orally revised,
was adopted.
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.21/Rev.1: Rights of
the child
6. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution had no programme budget
implications.
7. Ms. Ortigosa (Uruguay) said that Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Mongolia and the United States of
America had joined the sponsors. The draft resolution
addressed the fact that all children, even very young
ones, were entitled to full enjoyment of all rights
provided for by the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Special protective measures for early childhood,
a developmental phase essential to the realization of
the rights of the child, in light of the fact that it
encompassed 80 per cent of brain development and the
fastest growth period in childhood, were therefore
included in the resolution. The text also drew attention
to poverty eradication and reduction of infant
mortality.
8. Ms. De Geest (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, the candidate countries Croatia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the
Stabilization and Association Process countries
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Montenegro;
and in addition, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine,
said that the text of the draft resolution had been vastlyA/C.3/65/SR.51
3 10-64842
improved in the previous two weeks over the course of
lengthy negotiations. While not all concerns had been
accommodated — a nearly impossible feat to
achieve — attempts had been made to take into account
all views.
9. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Angola, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Benin, Botswana, Cape Verde, Comoros, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Israel,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar,
Malawi, Maldives, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Philippines, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Russian
Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Senegal, South
Africa, Swaziland, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Ukraine and
Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors.
10. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.21/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
11. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of position, said that his
delegation had been pleased to sponsor the draft
resolution. The United States of America continued
domestic efforts to strengthen existing protections for
children and pursue innovative ways to ensure that the
rights of children were realized, often through
cooperation with other countries. Investments in early
childhood education — a key element in domestic
policy — played an important role as well.
12. Mr. Bené (Observer for the Holy See), speaking
in explanation of position, said that his delegation
wished to point out that any resolution on child
protection must be faithful to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, which was the international
normative instrument in that area. Given that one of the
fundamental principles of the Convention was respect
for all children, born and unborn, it was dismaying that
the draft resolution contained elements that attempted
to introduce confusion in that regard. While the text
called upon States to include many appropriate
provisions for children in early childhood, including
measures to improve pre- and postnatal care for mother
and child, the introduction of the ambiguous term
“sexual and reproductive health”, to which the Holy
See had consistently registered objections, was not
found in the Convention and could be understood in a
way which hindered the advancement of maternal and
child health. It was also disconcerting that the
resolution attempted to go beyond what was set forth in
the Convention with regard to the responsibility of
parents for the upbringing and development of their
children.
13. He expressed concern that the Committee on the
Rights of the Child had gone beyond its mandate. The
Committee must adhere to the traditional rules of
interpretation of law, in particular to the 1969 Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties; it risked
undermining the international treaty system in the
realm of human rights, where it had actively promoted
an interpretation of international standards in a way
that undermined the fundamental rationale of law: to
protect life. The Committee’s recommendation of
studies on specific issues relating to child rights
constituted private opinions that could not create any
legally binding commitment. Moreover, any
recommendations made by the Committee to States
parties must be faithful to the text of the Convention
and respect children, the primary role of parents, and
the family, which was the basic unit of society. A
resolution on children that introduced elements that ran
counter to the Convention could not but cause States to
question the reason for ratification of such
international instruments.
14. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
explanation of position, said that her Government had
joined consensus on the draft resolution, as it attached
great importance to the rights of children and was
making intense efforts at the national level to protect
children and promote their development. Noting that
the international community had failed to perform its
duties towards children living under occupation,
especially in the early childhood phase mentioned in
the draft resolution, she highlighted the importance of
demanding that the occupying Power must provide
protection to children under occupation, in line with
international commitments. Her delegation understood
paragraph 43, which called for the provision of special
support and assistance to children in early childhood
who were suffering from discrimination or living under
especially difficult circumstances to apply to children
living under Israeli occupation. Similarly, her
delegation supported the affirmation that provisions on
children affected by armed conflict fully applied to
children living under foreign occupation. Lastly, her
Government reserved the right to interpret certain
paragraphs of the draft resolution on the basis of its
domestic legislation.A/C.3/65/SR.51
10-64842 4
15. Ms. Sapag (Chile), speaking in explanation of
position, said that her delegation was pleased that
negotiations had permitted original language
concerning early childhood, a topic barely addressed in
previous omnibus resolutions, to be incorporated. In
accordance with the World Conference on Early
Childhood Care and Education held recently in
Moscow, which had culminated in the adoption of the
Moscow Framework for Action and Cooperation, the
draft resolution marked a turning point in the process
of incorporating early childhood into the work of the
Committee and the United Nations system as a whole.
16. The Chair proposed that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488, the Committee
should take note of the report of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child (A/65/41) and the report of the
Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography (A/65/221).
17. It was so decided.
Agenda item 67: Right of peoples to
self-determination (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.54/Rev.1: Use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination
18. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution had no programme budget
implications.
19. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that the draft
resolution emphasized the importance of strengthening
the international legal framework that regulated the
use, financing and training of mercenaries, bearing in
mind the report of the Special Rapporteur on the use of
mercenaries as a means of impeding the exercise of the
right of peoples to self-determination. It was necessary
to develop and negotiate tangible proposals to promote
better protection of human rights, particularly the right
of peoples to self-determination.
20. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that India and Mali had joined the sponsors.
21. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, on behalf of the European
Union, the candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro; Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, said that while the European Union shared
many of the concerns about the dangers of mercenary
activities that had been expressed in the reports of the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries, it believed
that neither the Third Committee nor the Human Rights
Council were the proper forums in which to address
such activities, which should not be tackled from the
perspective of human rights violations and the threat to
the right of peoples to self-determination. Furthermore,
members of private military and security companies
operating in foreign countries could not usually be
considered to be mercenaries. The issue of their
regulation interrelated with several branches of
international law and was therefore not primarily a
human rights question. For those reasons, the European
Union would vote against the draft resolution, while
remaining engaged in dialogue with interested States
on ways to prevent the threats posed by mercenary
activity in an appropriate forum.
22. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that Switzerland’s
commitment to better regulation of the activities of
private military and security companies was
demonstrated by its participation in drafting the
Montreux Document on Private Military and Security
Companies, which set forth a code of conduct for those
companies’ involvement in armed conflict and recalled
related obligations of States under international human
rights and humanitarian law.
23. Switzerland was not opposed to a dialogue
between States on the negotiation of an instrument to
better regulate the activities of private military and
security companies. However, such a dialogue must be
based on a broad international consensus. As the
establishment of the intergovernmental working group
did not enjoy such a consensus, Switzerland would
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.
24. At the request of the United States of America, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.54/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,A/C.3/65/SR.51
5 10-64842
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Liberia, Mexico,
Switzerland.
25. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.54/Rev.1 was adopted
by 123 votes to 52, with 6 abstentions.
26. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that his
delegation supported the right to self-determination of
people under continued colonial occupation. In that
regard, the draft resolution should be interpreted in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Special Committee on
decolonization. However, the exercise of the right to
self-determination presupposed a population subject to
colonial domination. In the special and particular case
of the Malvinas Islands, all the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Special Committee
recognized the issue as a sovereignty dispute between
two parties, which could only be resolved through
bilateral negotiations that took into account the
interests of the Islands’ inhabitants. The Malvinas
Islands, South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich
Islands and the surrounding maritime areas were
illegitimately occupied by the United Kingdom, which
had expelled the Islands’ population and authorities
and replaced them with its own subjects. The situation
was therefore not a question of self-determination, but
rather one of another principle of decolonization:
territorial integrity.
27. Mr. Lomax (United Kingdom), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, said that the Government
of the United Kingdom had no doubt as to its
sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. There could be
no negotiations on the issue until such time as the
islanders so wished. His Government’s position on the
Falkland Islands was founded on the principle of
self-determination, as set out in the Charter and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The United Kingdom maintained a modern relationship
with its overseas territories based on shared values and
the right of each territory to determine if it wished to
retain a link to the United Kingdom. The
democratically elected representatives of the Falkland
Islands had recently expressed their own views on the
issue to the Special Committee. They had asked the
Committee to recognize their right to
self-determination, clarified the historical fact that no
civilian population had been removed at the time the
Islands had been settled and affirmed that they did not
want any change in the status of the Islands.
28. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, reiterated the statement
made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Argentina
to the Special Committee in June 2010. The Malvinas
Islands, South Georgia Islands and South SandwichA/C.3/65/SR.51
10-64842 6
Islands and the surrounding maritime areas were an
integral part of Argentina’s territory and were
illegitimately occupied by the United Kingdom. The
issue had been widely recognized by international
organizations as a sovereignty dispute between two
States. He reaffirmed Argentina’s legitimate right to
sovereignty over the Islands as part of Argentine
territory.
Agenda item 106: International drug control
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.16/Rev.1: International
cooperation against the world drug problem
29. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
30. Mr. Sánchez Contreras (Mexico) said that
Belarus, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Costa Rica, Egypt, Germany, Ireland, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Mongolia, Montenegro, San Marino,
Serbia, the United Republic of Tanzania and Tunisia
had joined the sponsors. The large number of sponsors
was indicative of an international consensus on the
need for a comprehensive approach and innovative
strategies to combat the world drug problem. He made
a correction to the sixth preambular paragraph: the
reference to “resolution 53/9,” should be deleted and
replaced with the words “the resolution”.
31. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Antigua and Barbuda, Austria,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde,
Congo, Croatia, Denmark, Greece, Grenada, Ghana,
Guyana, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lithuania,
Malawi, Mauritania, Nigeria, Philippines, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra
Leone, Suriname, Swaziland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Ukraine and Zambia had joined the sponsors.
32. Ms. Sapag (Chile) said that during negotiations
on the draft resolution, her delegation had made efforts
to include specific references to the work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to
mitigate stigma and discrimination against drug users
and people living with HIV, including through its
collaboration with Governments and the media to
support effective drug treatment methods with a human
rights perspective. In that regard, she was grateful for
the leading role the Mexican delegation had taken to
include such language. While her delegation welcomed
the inclusion of a reference to resolution 53/9 of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, it hoped that future
resolutions on the issue would include an explicit
reference on the importance of addressing
discrimination against drug users as part of a holistic
approach to treatment and rehabilitation. For its part,
the Chilean Government planned to launch a new
national strategy on drugs that would include a special
emphasis on the social integration of people dependent
on drugs.
33. Mr. Monterrey Suay (El Salvador) said that the
world drug problem had turned Central American
countries into places of transit. In response, countries
in the region, including Mexico, had adopted regional
conventions to combat organized crime, drug
trafficking and related problems, which had been based
on international instruments, including the United
Nations Convention on Transnational Organized
Crime. Drug use had far-reaching consequences,
ranging from violent crime and human trafficking to
detrimental effects on public health and social
development. In El Salvador, gangs had become an
extension of organized crime networks that engaged in
drug trafficking and extortion, and threatened public
safety. The Government had been addressing the drug
problem through the development of comprehensive
drug treatment policy that covered prevention,
rehabilitation and social reintegration. The draft
resolution recognized the importance of international
cooperation to addressing the urgent problems
generated by illicit drugs, as they were indisputably
transnational in nature.
34. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela), speaking in explanation of position, said
that the world drug problem endangered the health and
well-being of citizens and threatened the political
stability of States. Current international efforts to
reduce the availability of drugs of natural origin were
far from the goals established in international
conventions on the issue, including the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced
Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem. Her
Government was concerned at the dramatic rise in the
cultivation of illicit drugs, which was increasingly
affecting the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
other transit countries. It therefore welcomedA/C.3/65/SR.51
7 10-64842
paragraph 13 of the draft resolution, which urged
Member States to cooperate with transit States affected
by illicit drug trafficking. New strategies and policies
were urgently required from the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs in order to address the increased
cultivation of illicit drugs. Her delegation had
reservations about paragraph 14, as the Venezuelan
Government did not recognize a systematic link
between drug trafficking and other forms of
transnational organized crime. Assuming such a
connection denied the basic right to due process and
the right to be presumed innocent. Any link between an
act of terrorism and international crime should not be
automatically or permanently assumed. Instead, any
such connection must be dealt with on a case-by-case
basis. Finally, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
should work to develop criteria and analyse
information sources in order to make the statistics
provided in its annual World Drug Report more reliable
and transparent.
35. Draft resolution L/16/Rev.1 was adopted, as
orally revised.
36. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking in explanation
of position on behalf of the European Union; the
candidate countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the stabilization and
association process countries Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Montenegro; and, in addition, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said that the
European Union regretted that progress had not been
made in including human rights issues in the draft
resolution, including with regard to providing support
for drug users. However, the European Union would
continue to be engaged in international cooperation to
address the world drug problem.
37. Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago), speaking in
explanation of position on behalf of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), said that the members of
CARICOM were satisfied that some of their concerns
had been reflected in the draft resolution, in particular
the impact of the illicit use, production and trafficking
of narcotic drugs on children and youth; the
importance of cross-border cooperation to assist transit
States in addressing drug problems; and the
fundamental role of UNODC in assisting States to
combat the world drug problem. However, the financial
situation of UNODC was of great concern. The region
continued to suffer the consequences of budget
constraints within the agency, including the closing of
its Caribbean office. She urged Member States to
ensure that UNODC, which was an essential source of
technical assistance to all countries, was provided with
the appropriate resources to fulfil its responsibilities.
Agenda item 105: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.15/Rev.1: Strengthening
the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice Programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity
38. Mr. Mogini (Italy) said that Australia,
Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, China, Ecuador,
Egypt, Indonesia, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Mali,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco,
Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Panama, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Serbia, Sierra Leone, the Sudan, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Ukraine, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the United States of
America had joined the sponsors. The Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Protocols were unprecedented instruments to respond
to the threats to public safety, economic growth and
social development posed by transnational organized
crime. The draft resolution urged implementation of
the Convention and sought to grant greater visibility to
the fight against organized crime within the framework
of United Nations activities. It also confirmed the
support of Member States for UNODC technical
assistance activities in the field. The text had been
updated to address cases of connections between
transnational organized crime and terrorism; recognize
achievements of the sixty-fourth session of the General
Assembly on crime issues; stress implementation of the
new Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons; and acknowledge for the first time the issues
of trafficking in cultural property and youth crime. The
draft resolution also contained references to the
financial needs of UNODC.
39. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Cape Verde, Comoros,
Congo, Cuba, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Malaysia, Mozambique,
Nauru, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, SaintA/C.3/65/SR.51
10-64842 8
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone,
South Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe had joined as
sponsors.
40. Mr. Şen (Turkey) said that his delegation was
concerned about the errors contained in the report of
the UNODC entitled The Globalization of Crime — A
Transnational Organized Crime Threat Assessment and
therefore disassociated itself from the eleventh
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution. Those
concerns had also been communicated to UNODC.
41. Mr. Monterrey Suay (El Salvador) said that his
Government viewed transnational organized crime as a
shared problem that must be confronted through a
comprehensive approach which respected the
principles of national sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
The development of effective justice systems, which
should include mutual assistance among States, was a
decisive component in the fight against drug
trafficking. Like other Central American countries,
El Salvador suffered the consequences of drug
trafficking, including violence and transnational
organized crime, and had borne enormous economic
and social costs to combat that scourge. His country
had played a leading role in strengthening the regional
legal framework and had signed 12 bilateral
agreements with Latin American countries to reduce
the demand for and sale of drugs. The Government
would continue to work on a bilateral and multilateral
basis to exchange information and provide mutual
assistance on legal issues. His delegation fully
supported the draft resolution and urged the United
Nations system to continue strengthening its crime
prevention and criminal justice programmes and
support UNODC.
42. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.15/Rev.1 was adopted.
43. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela), speaking in explanation of position, said
that her delegation had joined the consensus on the
draft resolution, as it believed that the fight against
transnational organized crime should be based on the
principles of international cooperation and respect for
State sovereignty. However, her delegation had
reservations on several preambular paragraphs of the
draft resolution, which made imprecise assertions
without any sort of basis in international law. While
her Government recognized the detrimental impact
transnational organized crime could have on human
rights and the stability and development of States, it
refuted the claims made in the twelfth preambular
paragraph that such crimes had an effect on
international peace and security. Those assertions
contradicted the resolutions adopted by the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, which was the specialized organ of the United
Nations on such issues.
44. The fourteenth preambular paragraph established
a direct link between illicit trafficking in firearms,
transnational organized crime and terrorism. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela did not recognize
systematic links between types of crimes. Such
assumptions ignored the universally recognized right to
due process and right to be presumed innocent. Any
link between an act of terrorism and international
crime should not be automatically or permanently
assumed. Instead, any such connection must be dealt
with on a case-by-case basis.
45. Similarly, the seventeenth preambular paragraph
of the draft resolution claimed that States’ actions
against transnational organized crime and terrorism
were a shared responsibility. No such responsibility
was to be found in any of the 16 international
instruments regarding the fight against terrorism, nor in
any such regional instrument. Indeed, without an
internationally agreed definition of the terms
“terrorism” and “State terrorism”, it was impossible to
speak of a shared responsibility against it. Her
Government was committed to fulfilling the
obligations it had assumed to combat terrorism,
including by providing mutual legal assistance and
extraditing any person involved in terrorist acts.
However, the paragraph in question irresponsibly
distorted the language of the Bangkok Declaration on
Synergies and Responses: Strategic Alliances in Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, which did not
establish shared obligations, but rather affirmed
Member States’ readiness to improve international
cooperation in the fight against terrorism “in a spirit of
common and shared responsibility”. Furthermore, the
number of references to terrorism in the draft
resolution went beyond its alleged scope, as the issue
of terrorism was more appropriate to the work of the
Sixth Committee. She recalled that the mandate of
UNODC on terrorism-related issues was limited to
providing assistance to States on implementing
international instruments on the issue.
46. The Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice must, as a matter of priority, developA/C.3/65/SR.51
9 10-64842
objective criteria on the collection, use and
dissemination of the information it supplied in order to
improve the transparency and reliability of the data and
information published by UNODC in its reports. In that
regard, her delegation rejected the contents of the
eleventh preambular paragraph, which took note of a
recent UNODC report.
47. Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago), speaking
on behalf of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
said that CARICOM Member States appreciated the
inclusion of concerns of great importance to the region,
including references to prevention of youth crime,
measures to address illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons and the significant role of UNODC in
the fight against transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking. In light of the increasing demand for
the services of the United Nations Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice Programme and the acute needs
for provision of assistance to developing countries, she
reiterated strong concern about the financial situation
of UNODC. CARICOM had hoped for a stronger
demonstration of support by Member States for the
request to the Secretary-General to submit proposals to
ensure sufficient resources for UNODC in the budget
for 2012-2013. While CARICOM States had
undertaken initiatives at the national level, combating
organized crime required concerted action at the
international level. She therefore welcomed the large
number of sponsors of the draft resolution.
48. The Chair proposed that the Committee should
take note of the reports of the Secretary-General
entitled: “Assistance in implementing the international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism”
(A/65/91); “Improving the coordination of efforts
against trafficking in persons” (A/65/113); and
“Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice” (A/65/92).
49. It was so decided.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
50. The Chair suggested that the Committee should
take note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled
“Comprehensive study on the impact of the converging
world crises on social development” (A/65/174).
51. It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.