United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.46
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
29 January 2013
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-60863 (E)
*1260863*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 46th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 27 November 2012, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 68: Rights of peoples to self-determination (continued)A/C.3/67/SR.46
12-60863 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection
of human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.52*)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.52*: Situation of human
rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
1. The Chair said that a recorded vote had been
requested on the draft resolution.
2. Ms. Smaila (Nigeria) said that during the 2006
Human Rights Council review it had been clearly
understood that the Council should avoid politicization,
subjectivity, double standards and the “naming and
shaming” of States on the pretext of promoting human
rights. Since the General Assembly and the Council
should be both vigilant and objective in upholding
human rights, country-specific resolutions should be
redemptive rather than punitive, help the victims of
violations and be applied sparingly, on a case-by-case
basis. They should respect national sovereignty and
have terminal dates to prevent them from becoming
repetitive and losing their corrective value.
3. Her delegation was concerned about the draft
resolution because it held only one side in the Syrian
conflict to account. A selective resolution would
embolden one side and render the other intransigent.
Only a lasting solution led by the Syrian people
without external pressure would be effective. Her
delegation called on all sides to respect the people’s
rights, seek a just and peaceful settlement, and work
with the Joint Special Representative for Syria to that
end.
4. Ms. Hosking (South Africa) said that her country
had been erroneously recorded as a sponsor of the draft
resolution and asked for the record to be corrected.
5. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that her delegation would
vote against the draft resolution because it objected to
certain countries’ use of human rights to put others on
trial while supporting their allies’ bombardment of
civilians under illegal occupation. Such behaviour
reflected a double standard. The draft resolution
breached the principles of respectful dialogue,
international cooperation, impartiality, non-selectivity
and non-politicization, and addressed a matter which
should properly be considered by the Human Rights
Council through the universal periodic review. Her
delegation urged Member States to vote against the
draft resolution and avoid the use of human rights as a
political tool.
6. Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that the selective adoption of country-specific
resolutions for political ends undermined the concept
that international cooperation was the means of
promoting human rights. The universal periodic review
was the main intergovernmental mechanism for
reviewing human rights at the national level. The
General Assembly and Human Rights Council were the
pillars in the field of human rights, and should not
allow existing mechanisms to be abused by specific
countries. His delegation would therefore vote against
the draft resolution.
7. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that his delegation was
concerned by the violence in Syria, which had
worsened with the advent of terrorism and had
assumed sectarian overtones. His delegation had
always advocated a peaceful Syrian-led resolution. It
supported the Joint Special Representative’s efforts and
encouraged the international community to do the
same. The six-point proposal of former Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan and the Final Communiqué of the
June 2012 meeting of the Action Group on Syria
provided a road map for a Syrian-led process, but his
delegation was concerned that both sides were
choosing force over dialogue. It opposed coercive
measures, interference and foreign intervention.
8. The draft resolution held only one side
responsible and would lead to the hardening of
attitudes, and would thus not help the Joint Special
Representative or the resolution of the conflict. His
delegation opposed country-specific resolutions, but
would have appreciated changes to the text which
would have allowed it to support the draft resolution.
In the absence of such changes, it would abstain from
voting.
9. Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea), speaking in explanation of vote before the
voting, said that his delegation was concerned by the
draft resolution, which was not the consequence of
alleged violations but an attempt by certain countries to
distort the situation and put international pressure onA/C.3/67/SR.46
3 12-60863
the Syrian Arab Republic. The sponsors’ aim was to
change the political system and undermine the
legitimately elected Government. His delegation
opposed the abuse of the Committee for political ends
and would thus vote against the draft resolution.
10. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.52*.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Armenia, Bhutan, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Ecuador, Eritrea, Fiji, Guyana,
India, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Mali, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam.
11. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.52* was adopted by
132 votes to 12, with 35 abstentions.
12. Ms. Sucuoğlu (Turkey) said that the crisis in the
Syrian Arab Republic was a threat to regional and
international peace and security. Turkey shared
borders, history and culture with Syria and the
Government had always supported its stability,
prosperity, territorial integrity and national unity. It
would continue to stand by the Syrian people, who
should be allowed to decide their own future.
13. Ms. Belskaya (Belarus) said that her delegation
had always opposed country-specific resolutions and
felt that the draft resolution was unbalanced. It was
concerned about the continuing civilian casualties and
favoured the rapid resolution of the conflict through
negotiation. The draft resolution would not help in that
regard, and Belarus had therefore voted against it.
14. Ms. Furman (Israel) said that the situation of
civilians in the Syrian Arab Republic had become more
desperate as winter approached. Hundreds of thousands
had fled their homes because of the regime, and many
were now stranded without shelter, adequate clothing
or food. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimated that
3,000 people were leaving the country every day. The
number of civilians murdered by the regime had now
reached 40,000. Hundreds of children had been
arrested, tortured and killed in prison. The daily human
rights violations were a threat to peace and security in
the Syrian Arab Republic and throughout the region.
The Syrian representative’s attempts to shift the focus
of the discussion to other countries, including Israel,
would not distract the world’s attention from his
Government’s crimes.
15. Mr. Amoros Nuñez (Cuba) said that most of the
available information regarding the situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic was partial, imprecise andA/C.3/67/SR.46
12-60863 4
manipulated. His Government opposed country-
specific resolutions in principle; they were politically
motivated and unrelated to human rights. Politicization
had led to the disappearance of the Human Rights
Commission, whereas the establishment of the Human
Rights Council and its universal periodic review
allowed the human rights situation of all countries to
be considered equally. International cooperation was
the only way to promote human rights; since the draft
resolution did not further such cooperation, his
delegation had voted against it.
16. Mr. Fiallo (Ecuador) said that his delegation was
concerned by the deteriorating human rights situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic and insisted that those
responsible for the violence should be punished. The
text did not pay sufficient attention to all those
responsible, polarizing the conflict without
contributing to a solution involving all Syrians, which
would lead to peace and respect for Syrian sovereignty.
17. The Human Rights Council was the body
responsible for addressing all human rights matters.
Presenting a draft resolution to the Third Committee
served only to politicize the question and did not help
the victims. His delegation had therefore abstained
from the vote.
18. Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica) said that his delegation
shared the concern over the loss of life resulting from
the Syrian conflict, the impact on vulnerable groups,
and the growing numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Since the Syrian Government was
primarily responsible for protecting its citizens and
addressing the humanitarian crisis, his delegation had
voted in favour of the resolution, but felt that, given
the regional and international security implications of
the civil war, it should have been brought before the
Plenary of the General Assembly.
19. His delegation would have liked a paragraph to
be included urging the opposition to cease hostilities in
order to facilitate an inclusive Syrian-led political
solution, as suggested in the six-point programme. It
also had reservations about the paragraphs welcoming
regional initiatives about which his delegation had no
information. It did not condone calls for regime change
implied in the draft resolution.
20. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the
number of delegations which had voted against the
draft resolution and those which had stated that the
lack of balance in the text needed to be remedied
showed that many Member States were aware of the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. Although his
Government did not deny the existence of the crisis, it
rejected the idea that other countries had the right to
make pronouncements on human rights in the Syrian
Arab Republic, rather than providing assistance. The
motivation of the sponsors was political; they aimed to
“name and shame” his Government while funding
terrorists to conduct massacres which increased the
suffering of the Syrian people and led to the
displacement of refugees to neighbouring countries.
Only political motivation could explain the economic
sanctions imposed, their involvement in terrorism and
their hosting of a conference of terrorist groups which
had rejected the Joint Special Representative’s peace
efforts and the former Joint Special Envoy’s six-point
programme.
21. Certain States had taken positions as a result of
political, economic or financial pressures, a poor
reflection on their commitment to the Charter of the
United Nations. The Syrian Arab Republic suffered
from terrorism at the hands of many foreign nationals
who were funded through Persian Gulf oil revenues,
trained and allowed to enter Syria by Turkey, and
politically supported by European countries. That
approach would backfire on the sponsors and on those
who trained the terrorists.
22. Although there was no sin greater than the
oppression of innocent people in the name of religion,
the sponsors were pushing terrorist groups to conduct
massacres, loot hospitals, seize border crossing points
and smuggle armed terrorists from Turkey into the
Syrian Arab Republic in the name of God, under the
eyes of the Turkish army. His Government was keen to
maintain its special cultural relationship with the
Turkish people but rejected Turkish Government
intervention in Syrian affairs, which would set the
entire region ablaze.
23. In response to the statement by the representative
of Israel, he said that even Israeli historians had
acknowledged that all leaders of the Zionist entity in
Palestine had been terrorist chiefs, some of them
wanted under the British Mandate. The United Nations
had adopted hundreds of resolutions condemning
Israeli leaders and terrorist groups. The region needed
peace, not the undermining of the Palestinian people’s
aspirations or the occupation of the Golan Heights and
southern Lebanon.A/C.3/67/SR.46
5 12-60863
24. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that his delegation had
voted in favour of the draft resolution; he reiterated its
call for an immediate end to violence in the Syrian
Arab Republic. Military action would not resolve the
crisis; he therefore urged all parties to comply with
their human rights obligations and international law.
The Syrian Government was responsible for stopping
the violations, punishing the perpetrators and
protecting vulnerable groups. All parties involved
should resume political dialogue to end the conflict.
25. His Government had supported the efforts of the
Human Rights Council and the General Assembly, but
regretted the lack of results thus far. It called on the
Syrian authorities to comply with the Council’s
resolutions and cooperate with the International
Commission of Inquiry on Syria and the Joint Special
Representative. More Syrian Government engagement
in dialogue could lead to a more objective approach to
the human rights situation. The report of the
Commission of Inquiry had contained references to the
negative effects of unilateral sanctions and
acknowledgement that opposition armed groups had
committed war crimes.
26. The international community should support all
efforts to end the violence and achieve a Syrian-led
solution. The transition should be inclusive,
comprehensive, and mindful of ethnic and religious
differences. Brazil was home to a large community of
Syrian origin and therefore favoured a solution which
respected the will of the Syrian people.
27. Ms. Loew (Switzerland) said that her delegation
was very concerned by the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic and welcomed the adoption of the draft
resolution with broad support. It regretted the non-
inclusion of the references it had requested to the
importance of respect for international humanitarian
law and the need to refer the situation to the
International Criminal Court, the body best placed to
deal with such crimes, since the competent authorities
had done nothing to pursue the perpetrators. The
violence needed to end so that civilians would stop
paying the price of the conflict.
28. Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein) said that, as the
alarming situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
warranted the urgent attention of the Committee and
the Security Council, his delegation had joined the
sponsors. The draft resolution, however, should have
referred more explicitly to the need for all parties to
respect humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva
Conventions, and to be held accountable for crimes.
His delegation hoped that future resolutions would be
based on a transparent and open-ended process.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued) (A/C.3/67/L.9/Rev.1 and
A/C.3/67/L.10/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.10/Rev.1: Realizing the
Millennium Development Goals and other
internationally agreed development goals for persons
with disabilities towards 2015 and beyond
29. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, said that the
request in paragraph 9(b) of the draft resolution would
require additional resources of $50,900 in 2013 for the
production of one 8,500-word document in the official
languages by the Department of General Assembly and
Conference Management. Since no corresponding
provisions had been made in the 2012-2013
programme budget, additional requirements would
arise under section 2. Every effort, however, would be
made to absorb the additional cost within existing
resources and to report thereon in the second
performance report for 2012-2013.
30. Ms. Hernando (Philippines) said that Andorra,
Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, the
Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, India, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America and Uruguay had joined the sponsors
of the draft resolution.
31. The draft resolution was a contribution to the
preparations for the September 2013 high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on a disability-
inclusive development agenda beyond 2015. It focusedA/C.3/67/SR.46
12-60863 6
on the need for comparable data and statistics to
improve policy.
32. Her delegation believed that the text was
balanced and represented a broad consensus. It had not
anticipated the statement of programme budget
implications and, having checked with the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, proposed to revise the
draft resolution by inserting the words “within existing
resources” at the end of paragraph 9(b).
33. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, the
Gambia, Georgia, Haiti, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia,
Mali, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, the
Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
South Sudan, Tunisia, Uganda and Ukraine had joined
the sponsors.
34. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.10/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.9/Rev.1: Towards a
comprehensive and integral international legal
instrument to promote and protect the rights
and dignity of older persons
35. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
36. Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) said that
Belize, Costa Rica, Dominica, Haiti, Panama, Senegal,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Turkmenistan and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution.
37. He presented a number of oral amendments to the
text. In the third preambular paragraph, the word “and”
should be inserted after the words “Economic and
Social Council”, the words “and the Commission on
the Status of Women” should be deleted, and the words
“as well as of the Commission on the Status of Women,
as appropriate” should be inserted at the end of the
paragraph. The seventh preambular paragraph should
be deleted. In the ninth preambular paragraph, the
words “the majority of” should be inserted between the
words “essential contribution that” and “older men and
women”.
38. The thirteenth preambular paragraph should read
“Noting the reports of the Open-ended Working Group
on Ageing and welcoming the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
human rights situation of older persons, which states
that dedicated measures to strengthen the international
protection for older persons are called for without
further delay, including a new dedicated international
instrument”.
39. The beginning of paragraph 1 should now read
“Decides that the Open-ended Working Group on
Ageing, which shall be open to all Member States and
observers of the United Nations, shall”, and thereafter
continue as in the existing draft text.
40. Paragraph 3 should now read “Invites States and
relevant bodies and organizations of the United
Nations system, including relevant human rights
mandate holders and treaty bodies and the regional
commissions, as well as intergovernmental
organizations with an interest in the matter, to make
contributions to the work entrusted to the Open-ended
Working Group on Ageing, as set out in paragraph 1
above, and also invites relevant non-governmental
organizations to contribute, as appropriate, based on
the modalities for participation agreed by the Open-
ended Working Group on Ageing”. It should be
accompanied by a footnote referring the reader to
A/AC.278/2011/2, the February 2011 report of the
Open-ended Working Group on Ageing on its
organizational session.
41. He urged the Committee to adopt the draft
resolution by consensus.
42. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Gabon had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
43. The Chair said that a recorded vote had been
requested.
44. Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) asked
which delegation had requested the recorded vote.
45. The Chair said that the vote had been requested
by the delegation of the United States of America.
46. Ms. Loew (Switzerland), speaking also on behalf
of Norway in explanation of vote before the voting,
said that her delegation agreed that there was a need to
focus on the protection of older persons but was not
convinced that a new global regulatory framework was
required. A new convention would not fill the
implementation, monitoring and information gaps
observed at the recent meeting of the Working Group.A/C.3/67/SR.46
7 12-60863
Her delegation preferred to make better use of existing
mechanisms rather than create a new one. All United
Nations human rights instruments protected older
persons, leaving no normative gaps. The proposed
convention was premature because alternatives had
been proposed within the Working Group and the
Committee which should be explored further. Her
delegation regretted that the main sponsors had not
taken its concerns into account in the text. It would
therefore abstain from voting on the draft resolution.
47. Ms. Robl (United States of America), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
Group of 77 and China had proposed draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.13 on the follow-up to the Second World
Assembly on Ageing, which anticipated synergies
between the Working Group and the Madrid
International Plan of Action on Ageing and was
expected to be adopted with strong support. Draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.9/Rev.1, in contrast, gave the
Working Group a mandate to present a proposal
regarding a new instrument on older persons to the
General Assembly. It did not take account of the
discussions at the 2011 and 2012 sessions of the
Working Group, during which no consensus had
emerged on whether such an instrument was the best
way forward.
48. Older persons’ human rights were already
protected under existing instruments. There were
actions in the short term within the terms of those
instruments which should be considered. Scarce
resources would be better spent on implementing rights
under the existing framework than on negotiating a
new document and diverting funds from the more
immediate needs of older persons. Her delegation
would therefore vote against the draft resolution.
49. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, also on behalf of
the European Union and its member States, said that
those States were fully committed to the human rights
of older persons and aware of the serious challenges
they faced. While the attempt to strengthen the rights
of older persons was appreciated, the European Union
did not share the view that a new universal convention
was the way forward. There was no doubt that serious
protection and implementation gaps existed. However,
they were not of a normative nature; consequently, a
new standard-setting process was unnecessary.
Moreover, all of the existing human rights instruments
also covered and protected older persons without
discrimination. International, regional and national
efforts should instead be concentrated on more
effective implementation of existing standards and
mechanisms. Furthermore, creating another convention
would increase the pressure on an already-
overburdened and underfunded treaty body system.
50. The outcome of the forthcoming review of the
Madrid Plan of Action should also be awaited before
any decision was taken. The Open-ended Working
Group on Ageing had not yet exhausted its
comprehensive mandate; discussions should be
continued in that framework. The European Union
refuted the sponsors’ claim that the draft resolution did
not affect that mandate — in fact, it would expand the
mandate of the Working Group by asking it to consider
proposals for an international legal instrument and
present the main elements thereof to the General
Assembly. The creation of a new legal instrument
required international consensus, without which it
would lack the solid basis for it to be effective. The
probable lack of support for the draft resolution would
have a negative impact on the common efforts to
uphold the rights of older persons. More time was
needed to discuss the proposal at hand. He regretted
that the concerns clearly voiced by the European Union
and the alternatives proposed during informal
consultations had not been reflected in the text. The
membership of the United Nations remained divided on
the need for a new legal instrument; many were
unwilling to start working on a new convention as of
2013. For those reasons, the European Union member
States would abstain from voting.
51. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.9/Rev.1, as orally revised.
In favour:
Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Chile, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico,
Nauru, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Turkmenistan, United Republic of Tanzania,A/C.3/67/SR.46
12-60863 8
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zambia.
Against:
Canada, Somalia, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, China, Comoros, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malta, Mauritania, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sudan, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
52. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.9/Rev.1, as amended,
was adopted by 53 votes to 3, with 109 abstentions.*
53. Mr. Kumar (India) said that his delegation
believed that the resolution presupposed the outcome
of the consultations taking place within the framework
of the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing,
especially against the backdrop of the review of the
implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action. It fully
supported all discussions to explore ways and means of
identifying and remedying gaps in the implementation
of existing provisions of international instruments and
__________________
* The delegation of Argentina subsequently informed the
Committee that it had intended to vote in favour of the
draft resolution.
looked forward to discussing all possible options and
forging consensus upon completion of the review.
54. Mr. Hisajima (Japan) said that his delegation had
abstained from voting because the Government of
Japan had been engaged in United Nations efforts to
promote and protect the human rights of older persons,
especially in the Working Group. In the Working
Group and in negotiations on the draft resolution alike,
Japan had stressed the importance of resolving gaps in
existing frameworks and of first conducting the review
of the Madrid Plan of Action. The draft resolution
aimed to create a legal instrument without sufficient
consideration by Member States; bearing in mind the
ongoing discussions in the Working Group, it was
premature and could undermine its activities.
55. Ms. Teo (Singapore) said that like many other
Member States, Singapore faced the challenges
consonant with an ageing population. The Government
had therefore implemented a number of strategies and
social programmes to ensure proper care for the elderly
and supported international efforts. For those reasons,
her delegation had voted in favour. However, she noted
that negotiations had been difficult, with a number of
delegations voicing concern over the need for a
specific international legal instrument. She encouraged
all parties to continue working towards consensus on
developing such an instrument, adopting a results-
based approach to addressing the challenges of
vulnerable groups. Without that consensus, any
international instrument would be ineffective.
56. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that his country had
always supported the establishment of the Working
Group, having understood that exhaustive discussions
therein would lead to consensus to start work on a
treaty or its elements. While sympathizing with the
noble views of the sponsors, his delegation considered
that the draft resolution was trying to expedite a
process without taking into account the views of all
Member States. Consensus arrived at through
deliberation was the best way forward for any
international legal instrument. Accordingly, while it
remained fully committed to the protection of older
persons, Pakistan had been constrained to abstain from
voting.
57. Mr. Zhange Guixuan (China) said that his
country attached particular importance to the
protection of the legitimate rights of older persons.
However, China believed that the focus should remainA/C.3/67/SR.46
9 12-60863
on allowing the existing international framework,
particularly the Madrid Plan of Action, to play its role.
Member States should give due regard to the second
review and appraisal of the implementation of that
Plan. As to the creation of an international legal
instrument, his delegation was of the view that all
Member States should respect the mandate of the
Working Group and advance future work progressively
and by consensus.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.19/Rev.1 and A/C.3/67/L.20/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.19/Rev.1: Intensification
of efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against
women
58. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
59. Mr. Caboche (France), speaking also on behalf
of the Netherlands, introduced the draft resolution and
made some editorial changes. He said that Algeria,
Australia, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Colombia,
Djibouti, Iceland, India, Israel, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Maldives, Morocco, New Zealand, the Republic of
Korea, Switzerland and the United States of America
had joined the sponsors. Some 20 informal
consultations had been held, and the resulting text
represented the best possible compromise based on all
the suggestions made. The draft resolution was a joint
framework for combating violence against women,
with a series of measures that States must take to
protect victims. He acknowledged the flexibility of all
delegations and the expertise provided by the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women). He expressed
the hope that, in keeping with past practice, the draft
resolution would be adopted by consensus.
60. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas,
Belarus, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, Gambia, Grenada,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Montenegro,
Nigeria, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, the
Philippines, San Marino, Senegal, South Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine and the United Republic of Tanzania had
joined the sponsors.
61. Mr. Elbahi (Sudan), speaking on behalf of the
group of Arab States, said that the group would join the
consensus on the draft resolution out of its belief that it
was a common international objective, not restricted to
one region. Many of its proposals had been taken into
consideration by the facilitators, who had displayed
great flexibility in their efforts to have a balanced text
and to reach consensus on controversial paragraphs,
particularly the paragraph pertaining to violence
against women by occupation forces. The Arab States
had taken important steps to implement their
international obligations on the issue, including the
Arab Strategy for Combating Violence against Women
established by the League of Arab States in 2011. The
Strategy focused on the prevention of such violence in
armed conflict and on the increasing role of women in
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The League had also sought to include civil society
organizations in domestic and regional protection
frameworks.
62. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.19/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
63. Mr. Errazuriz (Chile), speaking in explanation
of position, said that Chile had made substantive
progress in eliminating violence against women
through preventive and protective measures. The
Government had undertaken legal reform regarding
women victims of trafficking, which was added to the
body of legislation that included laws on domestic
violence, family courts and femicide. Standards and
laws also made provisions for education programmes,
shelters and measures for protecting migrant women
who were victims of violence. Believing that to combat
the scourge of violence, it was necessary to develop
and promote education on equality and respect, greater
participation of women in politics and more job
opportunities, Chile regretted that some of those
elements were not present in the draft resolution. While
it would have liked to sponsor the draft resolution, as
in the past, it had been unable to do so owing to the
introduction of reproductive rights, on which there was
no consensus, into the discussion. Chile protected all
life from the moment of conception; consequently, it
could not interpret any part of the resolution as an
acceptance of abortion or a contradiction of its
domestic laws. His delegation hoped to continue to
contribute actively in advancing the issue, particularly
at the next session of the Commission on the Status of
Women.A/C.3/67/SR.46
12-60863 10
64. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that, while Pakistan
maintained some of its reservations regarding the text,
including the amalgamation of the mandate of Security
Council resolutions and references to the contribution
of religion and culture to violence against women, it
had been satisfied with the overall thrust of the draft
resolution. On such an important issue, potentially
divisive controversial references and unrelated
questions should be avoided. The international
community must take advantage of its collective
commitment to eliminating violence against women
and work to strengthen the protection framework and
take the necessary steps at policy and implementation
levels.
65. Ms. Phipps (United States of America), noting
the extensive and intertwined health effects of violence
against women, said that her country strongly endorsed
the draft resolution, which established a critical linkage
between sexual and reproductive health and
reproductive rights. The United States welcomed the
recognition in the resolution of the importance of
States’ compliance with commitments under the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD) and many
subsequent United Nations resolutions, which outlined
those rights and provided the foundation for the global
effort to eliminate violence. Her country would
continue to work to advance the implementation of the
Programme of Action, including sexual and
reproductive health and rights. To eliminate the many
forms of violence that women faced worldwide, it was
critical to promote and protect their reproductive
rights, including the right to make decisions
concerning reproduction without discrimination and
coercion. The basic right of all couples to plan their
families freely and responsibly was vital for advancing
the status of women.
66. Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) said that the
Russian Federation had joined the consensus as it
attached great importance to combating violence
against women, which remained an obstacle to true
gender equality. However, her delegation could not
agree with some of the formulations in the draft
resolution. While all cultures and civilizations had their
inalienable traditions, beliefs and customs, with
common human values that were the basis of human
rights standards, those traditions should contribute to
society, not serve to justify violence against women.
Traditions that discriminated against women, violated
their rights and jeopardized their health must be
condemned. Her delegation had repeatedly expressed
its views on certain harmful practices and was
therefore concerned about the use of the term “harmful
customary practices”. It was time to reassess the way
in the which the United Nations approached the
question within the framework of the dialogue of
civilizations; distinction should be made between
traditions and religions on the one hand, and prejudices
and harmful customary practices on the other.
67. While her delegation welcomed the transparent
and constructive consultation process and the efforts to
take account of the concerns and proposals of all
delegations, she nevertheless underscored that the
sponsors had not made efforts to understand certain
conflicting positions, complicating the negotiations and
threatening the consensus. She therefore wished to
remind sponsors that theirs was not only a right, but a
great responsibility; United Nations resolutions were
not the sole property of the sponsors and should
therefore reflect the diversity of the Organization’s
membership.
68. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her delegation had
joined the consensus on the draft resolution; protecting
women against all forms of violence and guaranteeing
all of their fundamental rights were State policies,
which had resulted in innovative laws — including an
organic law criminalizing 19 forms of violence against
women — and in the creation of special courts and
Prosecutor’s Offices dealing with cases of violence
against women and the national Office of the
Ombudsperson for Women. However, Venezuela had
withdrawn its sponsorship after the inclusion of
unnecessary mentions of Security Council resolutions,
part of a regrettable tendency of certain States to
distort the consideration of agenda items by the Third
Committee and the General Assembly. Furthermore,
her delegation considered that the very Bretton Woods
institutions to which exclusive reference was made in
paragraph 25, having imposed failed policies and
unjust conditions, were responsible for reductions in
States’ social expenditure and the poverty and
inequality that made women more vulnerable to
violence. There were a number of alternative regional
and international financial institutions that provided
unconditional assistance for relevant national plans.
She expressed the hope that the concerns mentioned
would be reflected in the draft resolution to beA/C.3/67/SR.46
11 12-60863
presented at the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly.
69. Reverend Wylie (Observer for the Holy See) said
that his delegation reaffirmed its reservations
concerning all references to sexual and reproductive
health and, in particular, to the controversial expression
“reproductive rights”. The 1994 ICPD report had
expressly stated that such terminology created no new
human rights, that abortion should never be a family
planning solution and that it was a matter of national
legislation. The Holy See thus reiterated that those
terms should never be construed to include access to
abortion or to abortifacients, particularly in the context
of a draft resolution on eliminating all forms of
violence against women, given their vastly
disproportionate consequences on girls worldwide. It
was also important to recall the provisions of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
obligations of States to uphold the rights and
responsibilities of parents with regard to the
upbringing of their children for their individual cultural
and spiritual development. His delegation also
understood gender to mean male and female, according
to customary usage of the term.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.20/Rev.1: Trafficking
in women and girls
70. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
71. Ms. Hernando (Philippines), introducing the
draft resolution, said that Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Hungary, India, Ireland,
Italy, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Niger,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the United States of
America had joined the sponsors. Recalling that the
heinous crime of trafficking in persons, particularly
women and children, was of such magnitude that
national or regional efforts were ineffective, she
highlighted the main objectives and action called for in
the draft resolution and expressed the hope that the
Committee would again adopt the draft resolution by
consensus.
72. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, the Bahamas, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire , the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Georgia, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Liberia,
Malawi, Monaco, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Panama,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia , Turkey, Ukraine,
Uruguay, and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had
joined the sponsors.
73. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.20/Rev.1 was
adopted.
Agenda item 68: Rights of peoples to self-
determination (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.54)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.54: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
74. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
75. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that since the introduction
of the draft resolution, Belarus, Belize, Chile, Congo,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Germany, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea Bissau, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liberia,
Mauritius, Mozambique, the Netherlands, Paraguay,
Seychelles, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Tajikistan, Timor-
Leste, Ukraine and the United Republic of Tanzania
had joined the sponsors. The sponsorship of the draft
resolution by 142 Member States reflected the wide
support for the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, as enshrined in
international law and human rights instruments. Self-
determination was a right, not a gift, and Palestinians
had long awaited international recognition of their
rights and backing for an end to Israeli occupation and
exploitation of their land. He hoped that Member
States would send strong a message of solidarity by
adopting the resolution by consensus, thereby
contributing to the ultimate realization of the long
overdue right to self-determination, with the
establishment of a sovereign and viable State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital.
76. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Barbados, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Guyana had joined the sponsors.
77. Ms. Furman (Israel), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that history had shown that
peace must be negotiated from within. Only IsraelisA/C.3/67/SR.46
12-60863 12
and Palestinians, together, could make the difficult
compromises needed; only they could create two
neighbouring States for two peoples living in lasting
peace and security.
78. Despite repeated calls by Israel’s Prime Minister
for a resumption of direct bilateral negotiations without
preconditions, Palestinian leaders had continually
placed conditions. Eagerly taking their message to
world leaders while refusing discussions with Israel,
they were more interested in advancing anti-Israel
resolutions at the United Nations than in negotiating
peace, as evidenced by the current resolution. Israel
had consistently demonstrated its willingness to
recognize Palestinian aspirations for self-
determination; the Palestinians had yet to recognize
Israel as the homeland of the Jewish people and its
right to peace and security.
79. Israel’s withdrawal from Gaza, uprooting
thousands from their homes, had given the Palestinians
an opportunity to bring prosperity to the Gaza Strip, to
make Palestinian self-determination a reality. Instead,
the bloody coup by the terrorist organization, Hamas,
had transformed Gaza into an Iranian outpost for terror,
whence, over ten years, more than 13,000 Hamas
rockets had been fired into nearby Israeli communities,
terrorizing one million civilians. That group’s actions
proved that its desire for the destruction of Israel
outweighed its regard for the Palestinian people; by
unconditionally embracing Hamas, the Palestinian
Authority effectively embraced the consequences of
terror.
80. While it was much easier to criticize Israel from
afar than to negotiate with it in Jerusalem, that would
not benefit the Palestinian people in Ramallah, Nablus,
Hebron and Gaza. Israel would vote against the
resolution but did not oppose Palestinian self-
determination and supported the two-State solution.
Clearly, the sponsors were not truly in favour of such a
solution; otherwise they would urge Palestinian leaders
to stop advancing futile resolutions and to start
negotiating with Israel. The conflict would not be
solved in New York, but in the Middle East. Israel
called on the Palestinian leadership to abandon
unilateralism and engage in negotiations.
81. At the request of Israel, a recorded vote was
taken on draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.54.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.A/C.3/67/SR.46
13 12-60863
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Honduras, South Sudan.
82. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.54 was adopted by
173 votes to 6, with 3 abstentions.
83. Mr. Diaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that his
delegation welcomed the adoption of the draft
resolution and expressed the hope that it would lead to
the prompt realization of the right to self-determination
of the Palestinian people and to an independent State of
Palestine. Argentina recognized the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people and had voted in favour of the
resolution, just as it had recognized Palestine as a State
in 2010, in a reflection of its desire to promote
negotiation towards an end to the conflict and its deep
desire for peaceful coexistence among all peoples. He
confirmed Argentina’s unwavering support for the right
of Israel to be recognized by all and to live in peace
and security within its borders.
84. Exercise of the right to self-determination
presupposed that there was an active subject in the
form of a people subject to alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation, as defined in resolution
1514 (XV), paragraph 1. Without such a subject, there
was no right to self-determination. The Malvinas
Islands were unlawfully occupied by the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which
had expelled the local population and replaced it with
its own population, with the result that the right to self-
determination did not apply to the question of the
Malvinas Islands. However, the other guiding principle
of decolonization — territorial integrity — did apply,
as established in all relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly since 1965 and of the Special Committee on
decolonization, which recognized the existence of a
special and particular colonial situation between the
Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom,
and noted that the way to resolve that sovereignty
dispute was through the resumption of bilateral
negotiations with a view to finding a just, peaceful and
lasting solution as soon as possible, taking into account
the interests of the islanders.
85. Mr. de Sellos (Brazil) reiterated Brazil’s support
for the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination. In a recent statement, Heads of State of
the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) had
strongly condemned recent violence and
disproportionate use of force which had led to loss of
human life. The statement had also urged all parties to
cease violence immediately, called for the admission of
Palestine as an observer State and urged the Security
Council to act according to its mandate and renew
efforts to address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
86. Brazil regretted Israel’s manifest lack of
willingness to cooperate in implementing decisions of
the Human Rights Council and General Assembly
resolutions concerning the Occupied Palestinian
Territories; dialogue and cooperation were the only
way forward. If other countries singled out by the
Council showed similar disregard for its opinions, its
effectiveness could be damaged. While he expressed
concern for the safety of the Israeli population, the
violations suffered by the Palestinians under
occupation were a continued obstacle to peace. All
parties must respect human rights and international
humanitarian law for there to be enduring peace.
87. Ms. Rasheed (Observer for Palestine) said that
the large number of sponsors of the draft resolution
was a testament to the support of the international
community for the legitimate right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination — a right that had been
brutally withheld under Israeli occupation. The
overwhelming support sent a clear message to the
occupying Power that its violations and contempt of
international law would no longer be tolerated and that
it was expected comply fully with all of its legal
obligations. The resolution was not contrary to peace
efforts; rather, it was complementary and vital. It must
be reiterated that the right to self-determination had
never been one of the permanent status issues, nor
would it ever be. It was not to be negotiated, as the
representative of the occupying Power would appear to
suggest, but a given, inalienable right for all and the
sole domain of the Palestinian people.
88. By voting against the resolution, Israel was
sending a clear message to the Palestinians that it was
not for peace or for the right to self-determination, but
rather that it fiercely rejected a real peace settlement
based on the existence of two States. For a just peace
to be achieved, the basic right to self-determination
must be mutually recognized by both parties. She
recalled the Palestinian people’s historic recognition of
Israel’s right to exist in 1988, in a compromise in
which they agreed to a Palestinian State on only 22 perA/C.3/67/SR.46
12-60863 14
cent of its historic lands. In contrast, Israel continued
to confiscate more and more land to build illegal
settlements and its separation wall in occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem,
further threatening a two-State solution. The occupying
Power continued to violate all of the rights of
Palestinian people, killing more than 100 civilians —
including 13 women and 33 children — in renewed
violence the previous week in Gaza.
89. Israel denied the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, denied Palestine its rightful place
among the community of nations and rejected its
peaceful efforts to advance the rights of its people. The
time had come to hold Israel accountable to the United
Nations Charter and the rule of international law to
which it was held as a Member State — a privilege too
long denied to Palestine and which it had grossly
abused. Palestine would not surrender its legitimate
national aspirations to realize its rights and achieve
peace. The international community must unfailingly
uphold the rule of law and not relent regarding Israel’s
crimes and impunity. The forthcoming vote by the
General Assembly on the status of Palestine would be
an historic day that would bring the Palestinian people
one step closer to achieving fully the ultimate goal of
establishing an independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
90. Ms. Walker (United Kingdom), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, said that her country had
no doubt about its sovereignty over the Falkland
Islands and its surrounding maritime areas. Her
Government attached great importance to the principle
of self-determination, as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. She reiterated that there could be
no negotiations on sovereignty unless and until the
islanders so wished. Their democratically elected
representatives had clearly asserted, at the most recent
session of the Special Committee on decolonization,
that they, like any other people, were entitled to
exercise the right to self-determination and had no
wish to change the Islands’ current status. They had
reiterated the historical fact that the Falkland Islands
had no indigenous people, nor had any civilian
population been removed from the Falkland Islands
prior to their settlement.
91. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, recalled his
Government’s position, as recently expressed by the
Argentine President before the Special Committee and
the General Assembly, that the Malvinas Islands, South
Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas were an integral part of
Argentina. As those islands were illegally occupied by
the United Kingdom, they were the subject of a
sovereignty dispute recognized by a number of
international organizations. That occupation had
prompted the General Assembly to adopt a series of
resolutions, all of which recognized the existence of
the sovereignty dispute and urged the two parties to
resume negotiations. Similarly, the Special Committee
on decolonization and the General Assembly of the
Organization of American States had adopted repeated
resolutions to that effect.
92. Argentina regretted the attempts by the
Government of the United Kingdom to rewrite history
with the obvious intention of covering up its 1833
invasion, which Argentina had repeatedly contested.
The distortion of facts highlighted the lack of legal
certainty with regard to its purported rights relating to
the Malvinas Islands. Instead of attempting to refute
historical facts it had already acknowledged, the
United Kingdom should meet its commitment to
resume negotiations.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.