United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.49
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
20 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-64431 (E)
*1064431*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 49th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 19 November 2010, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 105: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly
on Ageing (continued)A/C.3/65/SR.49
10-64431 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.30: International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
1. Mr. Rutilo (Argentina), speaking also on behalf
of France and Morocco, said that Cape Verde, Georgia,
India, Mongolia, New Zealand, Paraguay, Ukraine and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution, which urged States to
ratify the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a
matter of priority. The Convention was the result of
over 25 years of work by the human rights movement
and was the first international instrument to recognize
that acts of enforced disappearance constituted a crime
against humanity. It also entitled victims of enforced
disappearance to reparations. He noted that the date
proposed in the draft resolution to be the International
Day of the Victims of Enforced Disappearances had
long been used by families of victims in Latin America
as a day of remembrance. He made a revision to
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution: “eighty-six” should
be replaced with “eighty-seven”, as an additional State
had signed the Convention.
2. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Angola, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Comoros, Cuba, Senegal, Swaziland and Uganda had
joined the sponsors.
3. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.30, as orally revised,
was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.35/Rev.1: Human rights in
the administration of justice
4. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
5. Ms. Ploder (Austria) said that Gambia, India,
Lebanon, Mexico, Panama, Philippines and Ukraine
had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. Austria
had a history of advocating respect for human rights in
the administration of justice, particularly within the
Third Committee and the Human Rights Council, due
to a strong belief in the need for impartiality in the
judiciary and respect for the right to access justice and
for the rights of people in detention. Her delegation
was heartened by the sponsorship of so many
delegations. Consultations on the text had resulted in a
stronger focus on the rights of women and children and
the inclusion of specific references to the outcome
declaration of the Twelfth United Nations Congress on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the Rules
for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders.
6. The sponsors had agreed to make a number of
amendments to the text: in the fourth preambular
paragraph, after the words “(the Bangkok Rules)”, the
words “as a recent development recommended for due
consideration” should be added; in the seventh
preambular paragraph, the words “and relevant
contributions of special procedure mandate holders of
the Human Rights Council” should be deleted; after the
eleventh preambular paragraph, the following text
should be added as a new paragraph, “Mindful of the
importance of ensuring respect for the rule of law and
human rights in the administration of justice as a
crucial contribution to building peace and justice and
ending impunity,”; in the thirteenth preambular
paragraph, the words “and shall be” should be replaced
by the words “as well as being”, and the words “legal
guardian or other sole or primary caregiver” should be
replaced with the words “or, where applicable, legal
guardians or primary caregivers”; in paragraph 8, the
word “also” should be inserted before the words “the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner”; in
paragraph 9, the words “and by ensuring effective
access” should be replaced with the words “as well as
by ensuring access”; in paragraph 11, the word
“upcoming” should be added before the words “day of
general discussion”; in paragraph 12, the words
“babies and” should be deleted; in paragraph 13, the
words “as well as” should be replaced with the words
“bearing in mind”; in paragraph 14, the word “comply”
should be replaced by the word “complying”; in
paragraph 18, the words “Further encourages States to
establish independent mechanism” should be replaced
with the words “Calls upon States to consider
establishing independent national or subnational
mechanisms”, and the word “complaints” should be
replaced with the word “concerns”.A/C.3/65/SR.49
3 10-64431
7. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Angola, Morocco and San Marino had
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution as orally
revised.
8. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.35/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
9. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of position, said that his
delegation was pleased to join the consensus in support
of the draft resolution and welcomed the focus on
addressing the vulnerability of women and children to
abuse in the justice system. However, his delegation
was concerned at the draft resolution’s call for
compliance with some obligations that the United
States had not undertaken. While the draft resolution
emphasized consideration of the interests of the child
in pretrial measures and when sentencing a parent or
caregiver, his delegation also considered other factors,
such as public safety, to be equally important. He noted
that the call for States to ensure that life imprisonment
without the possibility of parole not be imposed on
persons under the age of 18 was not an obligation
imposed by customary international law, but was rather
a reflection of treaty obligations that the United States
Government had not assumed. His delegation
interpreted the resolution as reaffirming obligations to
the extent that States had accepted them.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.39: Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures
10. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
11. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, made the
following revision to paragraph 2: the word
“education” should be inserted after the words
“medical care”. She noted that the draft resolution
recalled the grave extraterritorial effects and economic
impact of unilateral coercive measures in the context of
human rights. Her delegation hoped for the broadest
support from Member States in adopting the draft
resolution, which would act as a strong condemnation
of such measures.
12. At the request of the United States of America, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.39.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of GreatA/C.3/65/SR.49
10-64431 4
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
None.
13. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.39 was adopted by
124 votes to 53.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.40: Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights
14. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
15. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that
the draft resolution had been based on the outcome
agreement of the 15th summit of the Movement.
16. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.40 was adopted
without a vote.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.44: Promotion of peace as
a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of all human
rights by all
17. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
18. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the sponsors, said that Gambia, Kenya, Madagascar,
Nigeria, Russian Federation and Tunisia had joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution, which reaffirmed the
right of all to peace and the obligation of States to
protect that right. The text particularly emphasized the
role of education as a tool for achieving peace. She
urged all delegations to support the adoption of the
draft resolution as evidence of their commitment to the
right to peace.
19. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bangladesh, Burundi, Comoros, India,
Jamaica, Swaziland and Uganda had joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution
20. The Chair said that a recorded vote had been
requested by the European Union.
21. Mr. Nihon (Belgium), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting on behalf of the European
Union, said that the European Union recognized the
relationship between the promotion of peace and
realization of human rights. However, the draft
resolution only considered States’ mutual obligation in
promoting peace and did not recognize individual
States’ obligations to their citizens in that respect. It
was the fulfilment of that obligation which made up the
core mandate of the Human Rights Council and the
work of the Third Committee. The European Union
could not support such an oversight and would
therefore vote against the draft resolution.
22. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.44.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,A/C.3/65/SR.49
5 10-64431
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Armenia, Chile, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Maldives, Samoa, Singapore.
23. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.44 was adopted by
118 votes to 53, with 6 abstentions.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.45: Promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order
24. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the sponsors, said that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, India, Indonesia, Lebanon, Madagascar,
Nigeria and Tunisia had joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution. The text had been updated to recognize the
impacts of the recent economic crisis and included
language noting the contribution that dialogue between
religions and cultures made to strengthening
international cooperation.
25. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Botswana, Burkina Faso, Comoros,
Congo, Lesotho and Zambia had joined the sponsors.
26. The Chair said that a recorded vote had been
requested by the European Union.
27. Mr. Nihon (Belgium), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting on behalf of the European
Union, said that, while the European Union recognized
that the issues raised in the draft resolution on the need
for a democratic and equitable international order
required analysis and action by all States, many
statements in the text were selective, presented out of
context and went beyond the scope of the Third
Committee. Furthermore, the draft resolution
emphasized international obligations to control the
mechanisms of globalization while omitting the duties
of individual States in that regard, a responsibility to
which the European Union attached great importance.
The European Union would therefore vote against the
draft resolution.
28. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.45.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,A/C.3/65/SR.49
10-64431 6
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Chile, Mexico, Peru.
29. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.45 was adopted by
118 votes to 53, with 5 abstentions.
30. Mr. Parham (United Kingdom), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, said that during the
Committee’s discussion of the resolution on the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the head of that country’s delegation had made a
number of obviously unfounded assertions, including
the bizarre allegation that the United Kingdom was
responsible for the death of Neda Agha Sultan. That,
the latest of many such baseless allegations by the
Iranian Government against his Government, was
obviously a crude attempt to cover up the former’s own
misdeeds and brutality. However, the outcome of the
vote on that draft resolution showed that such charges
would do nothing to divert the attention of the
international community from Iran’s human rights
record.
Agenda item 105: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.14: United Nations African
Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders
31. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution contained no programme budget
implications.
32. Ms. Kafeero (Uganda), speaking on behalf of the
African Group, said that the Institute served as a
mechanism for cooperation between Governments,
academic institutions and experts to mobilize human
and administrative potential. The programmes offered
at the Institute were driven by the demands of States.
Despite the commitment of relevant authorities, some
issues persisted due to low levels of resources and
insufficient awareness. The report of the
Secretary-General acknowledged the needs of African
countries confronted with escalating crime rates.
33. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.14 was adopted
without a vote.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social Development and of the
twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.11/Rev.1: Implementation
of the outcome of the World Summit for Social
Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of
the General Assembly
34. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution contained no programme budget
implications.
35. Mr. Al Shami (Yemen) said that Kazakhstan and
Mexico had joined the list of sponsors. More than
fifteen years after the Copenhagen Summit, much still
needed to be done to achieve the goals contained in the
Declaration and Programme of Action. With poverty
and unemployment still prevalent around the world,
social integration policies had been developed in a
piecemeal manner, resulting in limited effects on social
development. Moreover, the ongoing economic, food
and energy crises were undermining the gains achieved
in recent years. Against that backdrop, the draft
resolution, which was based on the text from the
previous year, included important changes and
elements in support of global efforts to promote social
development, such as the report of the
Secretary-General on the follow-up to the Copenhagen
Summit.
36. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Belarus and Turkey had joined the
sponsors.
37. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.11/Rev.1, as
amended, was adopted.
38. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union in explanation of position, said
that the European Union remained fully committed to
social development, as demonstrated by its traditional
sponsorship of the resolution in the past. While it had
engaged constructively in negotiations, it deeply
regretted that the outcome had not met its expectations.
The inclusion of references to agricultural policies and
their relationship to the food crisis — an assessment
the European Union considered factually incorrect —
exceeded the scope of the resolution and the Third
Committee, as did the discussion in paragraph 6 of
external debt relief, which should not be singled out asA/C.3/65/SR.49
7 10-64431
the only means of contributing to social development.
Moreover, both issues were thoroughly discussed in the
Second Committee, and references to them should not
prevent ongoing discussions in that or other relevant
bodies. Debt relief should be provided according to
existing agreed frameworks, and paragraph 6,
therefore, could not be seen as reflecting new agreed
terms. Under that understanding, the European Union
had been able to join consensus.
39. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of position, said that his
delegation had joined consensus on the draft resolution
despite the fact that the text could have struck a better
balance in addressing the relative impact of domestic
and external factors on social development. His
Government shared many of the concerns expressed by
the representative of Belgium on behalf of the
European Union. Numerous United Nations resolutions
recognized that the primary responsibility for social
and economic development — which could also be
affected by external factors — rested with national
Governments. The international community must
therefore address both internal and external causes of
food insecurity in a comprehensive manner.
40. Mr. Kimura (Japan), speaking in explanation of
position, said that his delegation welcomed the
adoption of the draft resolution. However, it was
regrettable that its concerns on paragraph 6 had not
been reflected. Japan would continue to engage
actively in building a society for all and in providing
assistance to countries in need.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older
Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.8/Rev.1: Follow-up to the
Second World Assembly on Ageing
41. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
making a statement of programme budget implications,
drew attention to paragraphs 28 and 29 of the draft
resolution. The open-ended working group to be
established pursuant to those paragraphs would meet at
Headquarters in New York and decide on its calendar
and programme of work by consensus at an
organizational meeting in 2011. The working group
would hold three sessions in 2011: an organizational
session to be held before March 2011 with a duration
not exceeding three days, which would require
interpretation services into six official languages for
four meetings and three documents with a total number
of 3,000 words to be translated and issued in six
official languages; a first substantive session to be held
no less than two months after the organizational
session, with a duration not exceeding five days, which
required interpretation services into six official
languages for eight meetings and three documents with
a total number of 9,000 words to be translated and
issued in six official languages; and a second
substantive session with a duration not exceeding five
days, which required interpretation services into six
official languages for ten meetings and three
documents with a total number of 9,000 words to be
translated and issued in six official languages. It was
understood that interpretation services would be
provided on an “as available” basis; therefore, no
additional resources were required. As for the
translation of the nine documents, an estimated
additional $131,600 would be required. The Secretariat
would seek to identify areas from which resources
could be redeployed to meet the requirements within
the provisions approved under section 2, General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and Conference Management for the biennium
2010-2011. Therefore, should the draft resolution be
adopted, there would be no programme budget
implications for that biennium.
42. Mr. Al Shami (Yemen), speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, said that Albania, Andorra,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Latvia,
Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey and the United States
of America had joined the sponsors. For far too long,
the issue of ageing had not received the attention it
deserved from the international community. The draft
resolution therefore called for the establishment of an
open-ended working group. While the original draft
had included a stronger reference to a specific mandate
to be assigned to the working group, the revised
version focused on more realistic goals and aimed to
allow all delegations to be involved in and comfortable
with that important process. As mentioned, the draft
resolution contained no programme budget
implications. As agreed, the working group would
function within existing resources for the duration of
its mandate unless an agreement was reached at a later
stage, by consensus. Moreover, it would not be aA/C.3/65/SR.49
10-64431 8
permanent forum on the issue of older persons but
would instead focus its deliberations on the issue
outlined in paragraph 28. At an organizational meeting
in early 2011, its calendar and programme of work
would be determined, as would the number of
meetings, which would be held at times when no other
major meetings were in progress. The Secretariat
would provide support with documentation on the basis
of available resources.
43. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, Iceland, Italy, Monaco, Montenegro, Norway,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, San Marino,
Serbia and Ukraine had joined the sponsors.
44. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.8/Rev.1, as amended,
was adopted.
45. Mr. Al Shami (Yemen), speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, said that the establishment of
an open-ended working group sent the positive signal
that countries supported the promotion and protection
of the rights of older persons, as all persons would
ultimately age. While the outcome of the group’s
deliberations remained to be seen, delegations could
take pride in the fact that a tangible outcome had been
achieved and an historic step in the right direction had
been taken.
46. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the European Union
attached great importance to the issue of ageing. While
longevity was a positive development, it also posed
challenges, including human rights issues affecting
older persons. The European Union looked forward to
contributing constructively to the open-ended working
group, while also considering the existing international
framework. He concurred that all activities of the
working group would be covered by existing resources
for the duration of its mandate, including during the
next biennium of the regular budget.
47. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
his delegation welcomed the adoption of the draft
resolution. It interpreted the references in paragraph 23
to the International Institute on Ageing in Malta and
the European Centre for Social Welfare Policy and
Research in Vienna as examples of structures dealing
with issues affecting the elderly. Those references did
not mean that the General Assembly had granted those
mechanisms any special standing or status.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.