United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.41
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
22 December 2010
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-62088 (E)
*1062088*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 41st meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 4 November 2010, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Address by the President of the General Assembly
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(b) Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women
and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly (continued)
Agenda item 61: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)A/C.3/65/SR.41
10-62088 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Address by the President of the General Assembly
1. Mr. Deiss (President of the General Assembly)
said that he appreciated the opportunity to address the
Committee and welcomed its contribution to the work
of the General Assembly, which helped to alleviate the
workload of the plenary. If the Committees of the
General Assembly were its kitchens, the Third
Committee was the busiest kitchen of all, judging by
the number of meetings.
2. He noted that many delegates in the Third
Committee had come from Geneva, which helped to
bring the two offices closer together and increased
understanding of the work being carried out in both
New York and Geneva, particularly in light of the
Human Rights Council five-year review.
3. He welcomed the extensive debates that the
Committee had held with the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the special procedures mandate
holders and commended the work being done to
prepare and adopt the draft resolutions. The
constructive atmosphere that prevailed in the
Committee was confirmed by the fact that over
500 speakers had taken the floor during the current
session.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(b) Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth
World Conference on Women and of the
twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.55: Follow-up to the
Fourth World Conference on Women and full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
of Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly
4. Ms. Melon (Argentina), introducing the draft
resolution, said that 2010 would be remembered as an
important year for the advancement of gender equality
as it marked the fifteenth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, and, more
importantly, the inauguration of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN Women) and the appointment of
Ms. Bachelet as Under-Secretary-General for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women. The draft
resolution contained a number of updates in reference
to those important events and also to significant
documents produced in the last year. It also called on
Member States to provide the necessary financing to
ensure that UN Women could begin its work without
delay.
5. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.55 was adopted.
Agenda item 61: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.24: Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
6. Mr. Atayev (Turkmenistan) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of Bulgaria, Cameroon, Croatia
and Togo as well as his own delegation.
7. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan,
Mexico, Montenegro, the Russian Federation and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
had become sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.58: Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
8. Mr. Kirst (Sweden), introducing the draft
resolution, said that the main change to the draft
resolution before the Committee was the reference to
the sixtieth anniversary of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in the
preamble. Paragraphs 3 and 6, referring to the
conclusions adopted by the Executive Committee
during its sixty-first session and drawing attention to
the commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the
fiftieth anniversary of the Convention on the Reduction
of Statelessness, respectively, had been added as well.
Paragraph 13 had been amended to reflect the
importance placed by delegations on collaborative
work in relation to common needs assessments.
Paragraph 14 had been adjusted to underline the fact
that the High Commissioner’s reform initiatives had
entered the consolidation phase and paragraph 33 had
been amended to reflect the evolution of the situation
of persons displaced from Iraq.A/C.3/65/SR.41
3 10-62088
9. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Afghanistan, Albania, Belarus,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada,
the Central African Republic, the Republic of the
Congo, Cyprus, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, France, Georgia, Japan, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the
Netherlands, Peru, Portugal, Romania, the Russian
Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland,
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland had become sponsors of the draft resolution.
10. Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) said that the
international community must renew its commitment to
humanitarian work in view of the challenges that lay
ahead. To illustrate, there were currently 11.6 million
internally displaced persons in Africa, representing
over 40 per cent of the world total.
11. Valuing the work of UNHCR as it did, Kuwait
was continuing to provide voluntary contributions: the
current year had seen a fivefold increase in those
contributions, from $200,000 to $1 million. Kuwait
also hosted a UNCHR office.
12. In addition, Kuwait provided humanitarian
assistance and support for Palestinian refugees, who
currently numbered nearly 4,700,000, funding many
infrastructure projects through international institutions
and providing voluntary support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). Such support was particularly
essential in view of the criminal siege that Israel had
imposed on Gaza and its continuing refusal to
implement legally binding United Nations resolutions.
13. Internally displaced persons in Iraq were also
urgently in need of humanitarian assistance. That was a
responsibility shared by the entire international
community, but Kuwait had shown the way with a
$1 million voluntary contribution to UNHCR.
14. Ms. Belskaya (Belarus) said that the
humanitarian problems posed by the forcible
displacement of more than 40 million persons around
the world demanded, over and above the response
efforts already mounted by the national Governments
concerned, strengthened cooperation and coordination
between UNHCR, the United Nations peacekeeping
forces, other United Nations agencies, the International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and
non-governmental organizations. Stressing the need for
strengthened international solidarity in tackling the
refugee problem, she called on UNHCR to seek new
partnerships and new donor funding. At the same time,
the steady increase in refugee flows made the need to
develop standard criteria for granting refugee status
more urgent. The migration of UNHCR to a needs-
based budget approach necessitated tighter control of
its expenditure and the avoidance of duplication with
other organizations.
15. Reviewing the refugee situation in Belarus,
where, since 1997, more than 3,000 people from 48
different countries had sought refugee status, she
reaffirmed her Government’s commitment to
productive cooperation with UNHCR and drew
attention, in particular, to the conclusion of an
agreement between Belarus and UNHCR on
cooperation and the legal status of the UNHCR office
and its staff in Belarus. The Government favoured the
expansion and diversification of UNHCR project
activities in its country and, to that end, offered the
training resources of the Minsk International Training
Centre on Migration and Combating Human
Trafficking.
16. Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro) said that, as a
member of the Executive Committee of the Programme
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, his country was working to mitigate and
resolve refugee situations. His Government would also
be organizing a round table on asylum and
statelessness in November 2010 and a celebration of
World Refugee Day in 2011 as part of the events to
mark the anniversaries of the Convention relating to
the status of refugees and the Convention on the
reduction of statelessness.
17. During the events that had taken place in the
Balkans in the 1990s, Montenegro had accepted
thousands of displaced persons. In order to find a
sustainable solution for those persons his Government
had adopted several policies, including the National
Strategy for a durable solution for refugees and
internally displaced persons in Montenegro and the
Action Plan to resolve the status of displaced persons
from the former Yugoslav republics and internally
displaced persons from Kosovo residing in
Montenegro. The new Asylum Act had initiated a
procedure to re-examine the status of all displaced
persons in Montenegro and a responsible and
non-discriminatory policy had been adopted in an
effort to provide those persons with the same rights asA/C.3/65/SR.41
10-62088 4
citizens. Refugees and internally displaced persons
could be granted permanent residence in Montenegro
or full citizenship. Voluntary return was also another
possible solution foreseen in the Action Plan. Efforts
were being made to ensure that the necessary
conditions were in place and to encourage displaced
persons to return to Kosovo, but assistance from the
international community was sorely needed.
18. Regional cooperation as well as the support and
assistance of the international community, in particular
the European Commission, UNHCR, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
the Council of Europe, would be needed to resolve the
problems in the Balkans. His country was actively
engaged in bilateral and regional initiatives, in
particular the Sarajevo Declaration and the
commitments made at the International Conference on
Durable Solutions held in Belgrade in March 2010. He
reiterated his country’s commitment to further
strengthen stability and improve cooperation in the
region and appealed to Governments and other donors
for sustained support for those joint efforts.
19. Mr. Starčević (Serbia) said that, as a country
with a large number of refugees and displaced persons,
Serbia agreed that addressing their humanitarian needs
was the core task in situations of conflict and natural
disasters. Full protection of the human rights of those
displaced, such as the right to freedom of movement
and property rights, was crucial for achieving
sustainable solutions.
20. In 2008, Serbia had been identified as one of the
five countries in the world with a protracted refugee
situation. It was fully committed to finding just and
sustainable solutions for the displaced population and,
in 2010, had hosted a regional conference on the issue
in Belgrade with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and
Serbia, as well as representatives of relevant
international organizations. Participants undertook to
intensify regional cooperation in order to resolve the
problem of displacement in the region. One of the most
relevant actions taken was consolidation of the data on
refugees and returnees according to a matrix prepared
by the Office of the High Commissioner, a crucial
element in the preparation of regional projects. A joint
regional project was being developed to address the
needs of the most vulnerable people still living in
collective centres.
21. The UNHCR Global Plan of Action on protracted
situations underlined the need to provide assistance and
find durable solutions emphasizing solidarity and
burden-sharing. As a follow-up to the Belgrade
conference, an international donor conference was
envisaged to discuss the establishment of a multi-donor
fund to assist the process of return or local integration
of refugees. Serbia was aware that the main
responsibility for the scope of the refugee problem lay
with the countries of the region and only by addressing
all outstanding issues appropriately could a just and
durable solution be achieved.
22. Another issue of great concern for Serbia was the
problem of internally displaced persons from Kosovo,
mainly Serbs and Roma, who were forced to leave the
province in 1999 and had been unable to return. In
addition to security concerns, there were serious legal
and socio-economic obstacles to their return, and
creating a safe and sustainable environment for that
return remained a challenge for all stakeholders.
However, Serbia remained committed to improving the
situation through special projects in cooperation with
UNHCR, following a needs assessment that was
currently under way.
23. Mr. Barimani (Islamic Republic of Iran) said
that recent international conflicts had created millions
of refugees and neighbouring countries, often from the
developing world, had to bear the heavy burden of
international responsibility to alleviate the plight of
refugees. That was particularly true of the Middle East
where, over the past 30 years, Iran had hosted one of
the largest and most protracted refugee populations in
the world.
24. That situation had imposed considerable socio-
economic pressure on the country’s capacities in areas
such as employment, shelter, education and health care.
The voluntary repatriation process, which was the more
preferable and durable solution, was extremely slow.
Local integration was not an acceptable solution,
especially for countries where protracted refugee
situations existed.
25. In the case of Afghan refugees, socio-economic
factors in their own country adversely affected
voluntary repatriation, and the international community
should accept greater responsibility for returnees and
provide them with more assistance for employment,
shelter, health care and education, under the auspices
of the Afghan authorities. Their future depended, aboveA/C.3/65/SR.41
5 10-62088
all, on capacity-building, empowerment and skills
upgrading and Iran provided extensive employment,
vocational and technical training opportunities for
Afghan refugees to enable them to assist in the
reconstruction of their homeland.
26. Iran had far exceeded its international
commitments regarding the assistance it had provided
to refugees and displaced persons, in terms of job
opportunities and subsidies for essential commodities.
However, implementation of the Targeted Subsidies
Law and price actualization would affect everyone in
the country. Iran hoped that the international
community would recognize the new economic
situation and help to address it.
27. Instead of focusing on the first host country and
providing the option of local integration, the
international community should strengthen
international cooperation with the country of origin,
host and third countries.
28. Mr. Mikec (Croatia) said that UNHCR should
continue to rely on comprehensive needs assessments
to address gaps in protection and ensure that scarce
resources were allocated to the most vulnerable in the
search for durable solutions.
29. At the March 2010 Belgrade conference the
countries of south-eastern Europe had agreed to
strengthen regional cooperation in order to end the
refugee situation in the region by focusing on the real
needs of the most vulnerable so as to offer needs-
adjusted solutions. The situation of people living in
collective centres had been singled out as a priority
project for cooperation among the four countries
concerned and a donor event was planned for 2011 in
order to secure a durable solution for their housing.
30. Nevertheless, national measures aimed at creating
conditions conducive to durable solutions were
required and Croatia had been implementing a number
of measures in the area of housing and infrastructure.
Moreover, it had often stressed that the issue of
so-called former tenancy rights holders should be part
of the durable solution process, and had introduced a
housing programme that enabled such individuals to
find housing in Croatia. A new action plan provided for
measurable targets and increased transparency;
furthermore, the Government had adopted a decision
allowing refugees to purchase rented accommodation
under advantageous conditions. However, to complete
the plan, similar housing support should be provided
by all host countries in the region for those who wished
to integrate locally.
31. Every refugee situation was unique and required
a sensitive and creative approach. In view of the
humanitarian and pragmatic spirit existing among
many of the countries in the region, Croatia hoped that
their refugee situation would soon be resolved.
32. Ms. Sunderland (Canada) said that Canada was
committed to supporting the mandate of UNHCR and
remained focused on efforts to secure durable
solutions, particularly to protracted refugee situations.
However, enhanced cooperation was required to
respond to evolving challenges such as the exploitation
of vulnerable migrants and asylum-seekers, and the
abuse of national asylum-seekers by unscrupulous
human smugglers.
33. Canada was extremely concerned by the problem
of human smuggling, which undermined public support
for immigration and refugee protection, while
endangering vulnerable people and exploiting national
asylum systems. The Government was introducing
tough but balanced legislation to restore fairness to
Canada’s immigration system for legal immigrants and
refugees.
34. Too many refugees, asylum-seekers and
internally displaced persons remained trapped for years
in situations of limbo and dependency. Canada
welcomed the efforts of UNHCR to increase the focus
on resolving protracted situations and was pleased to
contribute to the process. Its resettlement programme
was one of the most generous in the developed world;
each year it resettled an average of around 11,000
refugees through government-assisted and privately
sponsored refugee programmes. With the new
legislation, the number of refugees resettled would
increase by 20 per cent.
35. Canada welcomed initiatives to improve the
speed, predictability and coordination of the
international humanitarian response and encouraged
further discussions to determine how UNHCR could
best contribute to the response, including protection
activities in the case of natural disasters. Such
activities could only be carried out when the necessary
conditions were present. The global humanitarian space
should be preserved and expanded.
36. Canada strongly supported UNHCR efforts to
improve its efficiency and effectiveness and placed aA/C.3/65/SR.41
10-62088 6
high priority on age, gender and diversity
mainstreaming in order to address the individual
vulnerabilities of persons of concern.
37. A comprehensive approach was required to
resolve the problems of forced displacement and
Canada encouraged partnerships between development,
peace and security, and humanitarian actors to promote
consideration of displacement issues in non-traditional
forums. It also encouraged increased international
cooperation to strengthen rules in areas of emerging
concern, such as irregular migration and human
smuggling.
38. Ms. Boiko (Ukraine) said that Ukraine supported
the structural and administrative reform processes that
UNHCR had undertaken. Furthermore, UNHCR
actions to assist Governments with voluntary
repatriation of refugees or their integration into host
country societies should not be underestimated.
39. The protection of refugees and the prevention and
reduction of statelessness were primarily the
responsibility of States, in cooperation with the
international community and in compliance with
international law. With technical assistance from
UNHCR, Ukraine had adopted specific laws on
refugees and nationality in which the prevention and
reduction of statelessness was one of the guiding
principles. In addition, several temporary
accommodation centres for asylum-seekers were
operating, and it was implementing an action plan to
integrate those who had been granted refugee status
into Ukrainian society.
40. Mr. Borg (Malta) said that illegal immigration
was having a serious impact on Malta. Malta was the
most densely populated European Union member State,
with nearly 1,300 persons per square kilometre, and the
huge influx of illegal immigrants had led to an
unsustainable situation. Malta’s absorption capacity
was very limited, and its small labour market was
prone to saturation. Many of the immigrants were
eligible for international protection, and integration
programmes were being implemented, but there could
be no evading the country’s demographic and
geographic characteristics.
41. Fortunately, UNHCR and other organizations,
such as the International Organization for Migration
(IOM), recognized Malta’s difficulty and were
contributing to a pilot project for resettlement of some
beneficiaries of international protection in other
member States of the European Union. However, it
would be desirable for more States to participate in the
project, as the number of persons resettled was far
below the target level aimed at by Malta. Other
beneficiaries of international protection were being
resettled in the United States.
42. The European Union had recently established an
Asylum Support Office in Malta that was designed to
harmonize different countries’ asylum procedures in
the interests of consistency. It was to be hoped that the
Office would work closely with UNHCR and
authorities responsible for asylum matters in EU
Member States. It would also be desirable for other
Member States to agree to resettle beneficiaries of
international protection from Malta.
43. Malta continued to be committed to its
international protection obligations, and fully
supported ongoing efforts to combat illegal
immigration. However, more could be done,
particularly by countries of origin, to improve the
situation and reduce immigrant flows.
44. Ms. Al-Moflehi (Yemen) said that the care of
refugees had been recognized as a collective
responsibility of the international community ever
since the founding of the United Nations in 1945. The
refugee issue was one that continued to grow, despite
all efforts to address it.
45. Yemen, like other States, had taken in waves of
refugees beginning in the 1970s with the conflicts
taking place in the Horn of Africa. Those early
refugees had not been very numerous, and had been
satisfactorily integrated into Yemeni society, thanks to
Yemen’s fulfilment of its humanitarian duty under the
various human rights instruments to which it had
acceded, its customs, and its Islamic and Arab
traditions.
46. The initial refugees had been followed by
hundreds of thousands more over the past two decades.
Yemen had received them, established camps for them,
and provided support and care in cooperation with
United Nations organizations, including UNHCR in
particular, despite the country’s socio-economic and
security-related difficulties and the heavy financial
burden that the refugee issue entailed. Government
departments and agencies had been established to deal
with refugees, and they were one of the main issues
considered by the Parliamentary Commission on
Human Rights.A/C.3/65/SR.41
7 10-62088
47. Her delegation believed that the best way of
addressing the problem was to find solutions to its root
causes. Yemen was therefore working for a solution to
the crisis in Somalia that had resulted in massive
emigration from that country. In the meantime,
increased support from the international community
was required in order to deal adequately with a
growing problem.
48. Mr. Al-Obaidi (Iraq) said that paragraph 22 of
the report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees stated that the deteriorating security
situation before the March 2010 elections had
prevented many Iraqi emigrants from returning home.
In point of fact, those elections had been held in an
atmosphere of security and had marked a new step
forward in Iraq’s continuing progress towards
democracy.
49. Iraqi emigrants were returning with the help of
the Government, which had initiated a series of
measures aimed at helping and encouraging them,
including cash allowances to make their lives easier
until such time as they could return, action to provide
them with the necessary documents, and exemption
from the taxes to which they would otherwise be liable
upon their return. Officials who had left their posts
were deemed to be on leave without pay, and students
who had abandoned university places would be
allowed to return to them. The Government paid all
moving and travel costs for returning Iraqis, and
compensated them for any property losses they had
sustained.
50. His delegation deeply appreciated the work of
UNHCR. The Government of Iraq would continue to
cooperate with United Nations bodies to safeguard
human rights in general and the rights of displaced
persons and refugees in particular.
51. Ms. Yu Jeong-a (Republic of Korea) said that
new forms of forced displacement were emerging and,
in that regard, her delegation stressed that fundamental
principles such as non-refoulement must be respected.
It was deplorable that, in many parts of the world,
refugees and asylum-seekers were subjected to forced
return despite the serious risk of prosecution awaiting
them.
52. Her delegation shared a number of the concerns
expressed by UNHCR in the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation of Human Rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (A/65/391),
especially in relation to the continued reports of
violation of the principle of non-refoulement. It called
on all States to recognize the threat to the lives and
freedom of those fleeing that country in case of forced
return.
53. In keeping with its advocacy of rights-based
approaches to humanitarian assistance, her
Government supported UNHCR involvement in
matters relating to internally displaced persons, and
had taken note of the discussions on its intended role in
the wake of natural disasters. UNHCR should remain
in close communication with Member States on the
issue until a consensus could be reached.
54. Increasing emphasis was being placed on
comprehensive solutions to protracted refugee
situations. Her Government was taking steps to create a
better environment for refugees and asylum-seekers.
The first cases of naturalization of refugees in the
Republic of Korea had occurred earlier in the year;
furthermore, a support centre for refugees and asylum-
seekers was expected to become operational in 2012.
55. The challenges of coordinating protection could
only be resolved on the basis of a common
understanding among stakeholders. The commemoration
of the anniversaries of the 1951 Refugee Convention
and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of
Statelessness in 2011 would provide excellent
opportunities to renew commitments and forge ahead in
new directions if necessary.
56. Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia) said that despite the
steady decrease in refugee numbers worldwide,
insecurity and human rights violations still complicated
responses to displacements. Sadly, the number of
people internally displaced as a result of conflict had
reached an estimated 27.1 million; of those, an
estimated 11.6 million were in sub-Saharan Africa. His
delegation had therefore welcomed the adoption of the
African Union Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa
(Kampala Convention). He also drew attention to the
appointment of Dr. Chaloka Beyani of Zambia as the
first Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of
Internally Displaced Persons and appealed to the
international community to support his mandate.
57. Refugees in camps and settlements in Zambia
were being given electronic identity cards, to ensure
that credible data was maintained. Repatriation
programmes involving Rwanda, Angola and theA/C.3/65/SR.41
10-62088 8
Democratic Republic of the Congo had gone well thus
far. The conducive political situation in Rwanda had
justified the recent launch by UNHCR of a road map
for ending the Rwandan refugee problem. That
approach would ensure that only those who met the
criteria continued to benefit from international
protection after December 2011.
58. Zambia commended the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on the safe and dignified return of its people
and UNHCR on providing the necessary assistance,
thus enabling two refugee camps in Zambia to close.
The re-registration and re-verification exercise
conducted in the Mayukwayukwa camp had revealed
that over 4,000 Angolan refugees were eager to return
home. Zambia would continue to focus on voluntary
repatriation and to consult with UNHCR on the other
options, including local integration.
59. He called on the international community to
resolve the issues that led to displacement, both
internally and beyond borders. Zambia would continue
to support UNHCR in its efforts to protect refugees and
other persons of concern.
60. Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia) said that the
inability of hundreds of thousands of Georgia’s
forcibly displaced persons to return to their homes was
among his country’s most appalling humanitarian
issues. Since the early 1990s, hundreds of thousands of
Georgians had been driven from the regions of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which were currently
under foreign military occupation. Despite numerous
calls by the international community and tireless
efforts by the Government, those people had been
prevented from returning to their homes. A shocking
75 per cent of the pre-war population of those occupied
regions had been either killed or expelled.
61. More than 400,000 displaced persons of various
ethnic, religious, linguistic and cultural backgrounds
had been victims of brutal ethnic cleansing, which had
been condemned by international bodies including the
United Nations. Those few who had managed to return
to their homes near the occupation line suffered from
insecurity and discrimination and had been deprived of
their right to free movement across the administrative
border line, which had become the occupation line.
62. The General Assembly had stressed the right of
return of Georgia’s internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees to their homes; the Special Representative
of the United Nations Secretary-General on the Human
Rights of Internally Displaced Persons had said in
October 2010 that the refusal to let the IDPs and
refugees return to their homes was “purely political”;
and the Secretary-General himself had emphasized the
inadmissibility of linking political problems to the
realization of right of return.
63. Georgia called on its opponents to engage
constructively in international efforts to allow the
hundreds of thousands of Georgia’s displaced persons
to return to their homes and communities.
64. He underscored the importance his Government
attached to the discussions underway in Geneva to
address matters of security and stability in occupied
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali and the safe and dignified
return of internally displaced persons and refugees.
However, the negative position of its counterparts was
hindering progress.
65. In order to provide adequate living conditions for
internally displaced persons, his Government had
adopted a strategy which established transparent and
fair criteria for access to social assistance, and
regularly updated the national action plan. Public
buildings had been converted into temporary shelters
and new settlements had been built. Furthermore,
social welfare, education and health programmes had
been extended to include or to provide coverage for
internally displaced persons, and a community
development project had been approved to enhance
their social and economic reintegration.
66. Mr. Momen (Bangladesh) said that UNHCR had
accomplished a great deal, despite its limited
resources, but strategies must be developed to address
the new challenges facing refugees and displaced
persons resulting from an increase in conflicts,
violence, persecution and deprivation, as well as
natural disasters.
67. The experience of the Bangladesh Liberation War
had helped his Government to empathize with, and so
provide shelter, safety and relief for, refugees from
Myanmar, despite limited resources.
68. Although his country was not party to the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees or its
Protocol, it had addressed the basic needs of refugees,
protected them and fully respected the principle of
non-refoulement. His Government considered
voluntary repatriation as the only viable option for the
return of refugees to their homeland. It was regrettable,A/C.3/65/SR.41
9 10-62088
however, that no refugees from Myanmar had been
repatriated since 2005. As many countries hosting
refugees were either developing or least developed
countries, including Bangladesh, integrating refugees
locally was not a solution. It would therefore be
beneficial if the remaining Myanmar refugees could be
repatriated as soon as possible with the cooperation of
UNHCR. The resumption of repatriations would
demonstrate that the right to return was available to
those refugees and provide a durable solution to the
problem, rather than complicated, piecemeal third-
country resettlement. He called on all Member States,
international donors, civil society and non-
governmental organizations to increase support to
UNHCR, as it was their collective and moral obligation
to ensure the well-being of the 36.5 million refugees
and internally displaced persons worldwide.
69. Mr. Garayev (Azerbaijan) said that in light of
the blatant violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law during recent armed conflicts, all
parties should adhere to their international, legal
obligations. Population growth, urbanization, food and
energy insecurity, water scarcity and climate change
were also directly or indirectly responsible for new
forms of population displacement.
70. He called on UNHCR to do its utmost to provide
support to those in protracted refugee situations and to
facilitate voluntary repatriation as a durable solution to
that problem. His Government considered that, as a
human rights issue, the right to return had priority over
other related issues. Within Azerbaijan, since the
beginning of the conflict, significant numbers of
settlers had been encouraged to move into occupied
areas, thus undermining the right to return of those
internally displaced persons.
71. His Government took refugees and internally
displaced persons into account in its regional poverty
reduction and economic development strategies and
projects. However, more must be done to raise
awareness among the international community of such
ongoing, protracted situations once the emergency
phase had passed. Therefore, he called on all relevant
United Nations bodies and specialized agencies to
focus on specific cases and provide solutions.
72. Ms. Klein Solomon (International Organization
for Migration (IOM)) said that the fact that other
entities such as UNHCR had specific mandates on
aspects of human mobility made collaboration and
cooperation between all relevant agencies critical.
Moreover, the policies that Governments developed to
address migratory phenomena would also have a direct
impact on the protection of refugees. Major tasks that
drew on the complementary mandates of UNHCR and
IOM included resettlement and emergency response. In
the aftermath of the catastrophic natural disasters of
2010, for instance, both organizations had worked
through the humanitarian response coordinated by the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee to assist and protect
those in need. In particular, as IOM was increasingly
called to provide assistance to persons internally
displaced by natural disasters, it appreciated the
leading role assumed by UNHCR, the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) in such situations.
73. Preparation was crucial, given predictions that
the frequency of natural disasters was likely to increase
and result in increased population movements in the
years to come. In that connection, IOM attached great
importance to the nexus between migration, climate
change and the environment and would explore the role
that migration could play as a survival strategy.
74. In line with the organization’s comprehensive
approach to migration, a wide range of policy, research
and programmatic activities had been developed. The
complexity of issues surrounding migration, climate
change and the environment could not be addressed
effectively without interagency cooperation and
common and complementary approaches. IOM looked
forward to continuing its productive collaboration with
UNHCR and recognized that more needed to be done
in order to respond in time and adequately to the needs
of refugees, displaced persons and vulnerable migrants.
75. Mr. Dorbes (International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC)) said that situations of violence were
among the primary — and the most
distressing — causes of displacement. Other causes
could also be traumatizing, as demonstrated by recent
natural disasters in Haiti and Pakistan. The International
Committee of the Red Cross worked primarily in
situations of armed conflict and other situations of
violence. A policy had been adopted by the Council of
Delegates of the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement to strengthen protection and
improve assistance provided to persons affected by
internal displacement.A/C.3/65/SR.41
10-62088 10
76. In situations of armed conflict, internally
displaced persons were mainly civilians; taking
effective measures to limit deliberate attacks on them
reduced successive displacements and improved
prospects for safe and dignified return. ICRC therefore
constantly reminded the parties to conflict of their
obligations under international law to protect the
civilian population.
77. Focusing only on the needs of IDPs in camps
might lead to neglect of host families and communities,
who shouldered the burden of large population
displacements, hence the need for a rights-based
approach that allowed the Movement to deliver
humanitarian assistance and services fairly and
impartially to communities affected by displacement,
to people at risk of displacement and to those who had
found shelter outside IDP camps.
78. Ending displacement was often difficult, as
political considerations or other significant obstacles,
such as lack of housing or absence of public services,
could result in the displaced being left in limbo. States
must address such important issues and exert
commensurate efforts to find successful and
sustainable solutions to displacement. In that regard,
the ICRC welcomed the recently adopted Kampala
Convention, which was in the process of being ratified.
79. ICRC and the International Federation were
engaged in dialogue with United Nations agencies on
cooperation agreements between them, so as to ensure
that national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
were able to assist displaced persons in accordance
with the Fundamental Principles of the Movement
when cooperating with the United Nations system.
80. Ms. Christensen (International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies) said that the
increasing frequency of natural disasters was inflicting
greater damage, loss and dislocation on vulnerable
people worldwide as well as increasing the number of
people vulnerable to such disasters. In responding to
them, the Federation adopted a needs-based approach
to ensure that the most vulnerable received assistance,
regardless of any legal entitlements.
81. While preventing displacement due to natural
disasters should be a priority for the humanitarian
community, it was essential to provide immediate relief
and care to the displaced and their host communities
and to work towards early recovery when displacement
did occur. As local first responders, Red Cross and Red
Crescent national societies carried out prevention and
response work through a range of initiatives.
82. Turning to food insecurity, she pointed out that
without adequate interventions, the approximately
1 billion people who were undernourished and lacking
access to sufficient food might be prompted to migrate
to the outskirts of towns in search of better conditions.
Challenges awaited vulnerable migrants in urban
settings, as for the first time in human history, more
people lived in an urban environment than in a rural
one. Moreover, many urban dwellers found themselves
in precarious conditions created by rapid urbanization,
population growth, poor health services, poor local
governance, and in many cases, the rising tide of urban
violence. Collectively, it was necessary to do much
more to keep pace with such development and to build
safer and more resilient communities in rural and urban
settings alike. In the coming years, the Federation
would work with relevant partners to improve its
preparedness to respond in complex urban
environments, drawing on lessons learned from recent
disasters.
83. Mr. Chir (Algeria), speaking in exercise of the
right to reply to statements made by the Moroccan
delegation, said that his Government had consistently
indicated its readiness to resume the census process so
that voluntarily repatriated Sahrawi refugees could
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination in
a referendum organized by the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). If
Morocco was ready to have a referendum held soon
under international control and free of all
administrative or military pressures, the voter data
gathered by the MINURSO Identification Commission
were available at the United Nations.
84. As for the supposed human rights violations in
the refugee camps in Tindouf, the best way to verify
the truth of that Moroccan allegation would be to
extend the MINURSO mandate to human rights
monitoring, something which Morocco had
consistently opposed. His delegation knew nothing
about hundreds of Sahrawi refugees fleeing the
Tindouf camps to return to Morocco; on the other
hand, it did know that thousands of Sahrawis were
leaving cities in the Territory and forming protest
camps in the desert to attract world attention to the
repeated, serious violations of their rights by Morocco.
Shockingly, a young Sahrawi seeking to bring
provisions to such a camp east of Laayoune had beenA/C.3/65/SR.41
11 10-62088
gunned down in late October 2010. Both the Sahrawi
refugees and the Sahrawis living in the Non-Self-
Governing Territory of Western Sahara had the right to
international protection, which Moroccan intransigence
on human rights monitoring was denying them.
85. Furthermore, without giving credence to
Morocco’s unfounded accusations of the
misappropriation of humanitarian aid, the donor
community had the means to ascertain whether
assistance had indeed reached its final destination.
Both Algeria and UNHCR had always been satisfied
with the aid distribution, a conclusion confirmed by the
joint World Food Programme (WFP)-UNHCR mission
to the Sahrawi refugee camps conducted in October
2009.
86. Algeria wished full success to the two parties to
the conflict — Morocco and the Frente Polisario — in
the informal talks they would soon resume in an
attempt to reach a mutually acceptable political
solution that would allow the Sahrawi people to
exercise their right to self-determination. The
humanitarian aspects were simply the dramatic
consequence of the absence of a just, lasting and
definitive settlement.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.