United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.43
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
17 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-62889 (E)
*1062889*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 43rd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 9 November 2010, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 61: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 63: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 66: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
Agenda item 67: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 61: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)A/C.3/65/SR.43
10-62889 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 61: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.56: Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa
1. Ms. Sulimani (Sierra Leone), introducing the
draft resolution on behalf of the African Group, said
that the text contained a few updates and changes to
the resolution adopted by the Committee last year.
Those changes included a new formulation for
preambular paragraph 4, which should read “gravely
concerned by the poor living conditions of a large
number of refugees and displaced persons in many
regions in Africa”.
2. Paragraph 3 of the resolution adopted last year had
been deleted as the information was outdated. Paragraph
5 had been updated to reflect the most recent decision
adopted by the Executive Council of the African Union.
A reference to the sixtieth anniversary of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
had been added to paragraph 6. Paragraph 8 had been
added to draw attention to the important conclusions
adopted by the Executive Committee of the Programme
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
at its sixty-first session, which provided guidance on
identifying protracted refugee situations and on
protecting persons with disabilities, as well as guidelines
on preventing, responding to and solving such
situations. Lastly, paragraph 31 had been modified to
request that the Secretary-General submit a
comprehensive report on the matter at the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.
3. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Haiti and Portugal had become
sponsors of the draft resolution.
Agenda item 63: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.59: Proclamation of
24 March as the International Day for the Right to
Truth concerning Gross Human Rights Violations and
for the Dignity of Victims
4. Mr. García González (El Salvador) said that
Armenia, Belgium, Colombia, Ecuador, Greece,
Honduras, Italy and Panama had joined the sponsors.
The call for 24 March to be proclaimed International
Day for the Right to the Truth concerning Gross
Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of
Victims had been made to honour the memory and life
of victims of serious and systematic violations of
human rights and to recall the importance of the right
to truth and justice. It was Member States’ moral and
political responsibility to pay tribute to those who had
dedicated their lives to promoting human rights and
those who had died fighting for that cause. In
particular, it honoured the invaluable efforts of
Monsignor Óscar Arnulfo Romero, former Archbishop
of El Salvador, who became the voice for those who
could not make their voices heard. It would be a day of
hope and national remembrance. As the President of
El Salvador had acknowledged, Monsignor Romero
had been illegally killed by a death squad and the
perpetrators had been protected by State officials.
Those responsible had been identified by international
tribunals of the United Nations and the Organization of
American States. The decisions of those bodies had
been accepted by El Salvador and the President had
publicly asked for forgiveness for the murder of
Monsignor Romero.
5. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus,
Jamaica, Luxembourg, Montenegro, Portugal, Serbia
and Slovenia had become sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.57: Report of the Human
Rights Council
6. Mr. Diallo (Mali) introduced the draft resolution
on behalf of the Group of African States and requested
its adoption by consensus.
7. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Russian Federation and Turkey had
joined as sponsors.
Agenda item 66: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)A/C.3/65/SR.43
3 10-62889
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.50: Inadmissibility of
certain practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
8. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation), introducing
draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.50 on behalf of its
sponsors, said that Angola, Benin, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua,
Uganda and Uzbekistan had joined the sponsors.
9. Regrettably, the draft resolution was growing
more and more relevant. The sponsors of the draft
resolution were profoundly concerned about the rise in
neo-Nazi and skinhead groups that committed violent
acts against people of other races and religions. They
were particularly grateful to the Special Rapporteur on
Contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, who had for two
consecutive years done special work on the issues
referred to in the previous year’s resolution on the
same topic.
10. It was utterly unacceptable to make heroes of
those who had been involved in Nazi crimes, such as
members of the SS and Waffen SS, organizations
deemed criminal by the Nuremburg Tribunal.
Dedication ceremonies for Nazi memorials,
proclamations of the dates of liberation from Nazism
as days of mourning and detention of people who
called for remembrance of those who had fought the
Nazis had all become regular occurrences, highlighting
the relevance of the draft resolution. Such acts were
sacrilegious, and they played into the hands of those
who agitated for “racial purity” and racial and ethnic
discrimination.
11. The Nuremburg Tribunal, whose sixty-fifth
anniversary would be marked on 20 November 2010,
had clearly shown who had represented the force of
good and who the force of evil during the Second
World War. Attempts to revisit those decisions could
not be countenanced.
12. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Cuba, Guinea, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia and Zimbabwe had become sponsors of the
draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.53: International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination
13. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the list of sponsors included on the draft resolution
should also include Slovenia.
14. Ms. Ponikvar (Slovenia), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Albania, Andorra, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary,
Kazakhstan, Romania and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia had also become sponsors. The
biennial resolution called for the effective
implementation of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. The
first part of the resolution focused on the work of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, based on the reports it produced.
Paragraph 6 had been added to highlight the criteria for
the nomination of Committee members and reference
had been made in paragraph 15 to General Assembly
resolution 63/243, which had proved to be effective in
reducing the backlog of reports awaiting consideration.
The second part considered the financial situation of
the Committee and called on States parties to ratify the
amendment to the Convention concerning the financing
of the Committee and to provide adequate funding. The
third section on the status of the Convention now
included paragraph 24.
15. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Azerbaijan, El Salvador, Georgia,
Monaco and Thailand had become sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Agenda item 67: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.51: Universal realization of
the right of peoples to self-determination
16. Mr. Sial (Pakistan) said that the Central African
Republic, Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Niger
and Somalia had become sponsors of the draft
resolution. The right to self-determination was laid
down in Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations
as one of the fundamental rights and the basis for all
human rights. It was also the cornerstone of the
International Covenants on Human Rights. Exercising
that right had led peoples to rise up and free
themselves from colonialism, apartheid, foreign
occupation and alien domination. The text of the draftA/C.3/65/SR.43
10-62889 4
resolution contained only minor updates to the text
adopted by the Committee at its sixty-fourth session.
17. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Angola, Benin, Cameroon, Côte
d’Ivoire, Madagascar, Nicaragua, Saint Lucia, Senegal,
Togo and Tunisia had become sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.52: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
18. Mr. Selim (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the
95 sponsors, which included Armenia, Austria, Belarus,
Belgium, China, the Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Finland, France, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Monaco, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Switzerland and Viet Nam, said that while the
Palestinian people were denied the basic human right
of self-determination his delegation would continue to
sponsor the resolution in the Committee. The draft
resolution contained a number of technical updates, but
the text was largely the same as that adopted by the
Committee last year. He hoped that Member States
would send a strong message of solidarity to the
Palestinian people by adopting the resolution and that
their right to self-determination would soon be
recognized and an independent, viable sovereign State
could be established, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
where the Palestinian people could live alongside
Israel.
19. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Angola, Botswana, Croatia,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Jamaica, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali,
Mozambique, the Republic of Moldova, the Republic
of the Congo, Serbia, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland had become sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.54: Use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
20. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution on behalf of the sponsors, which
included the Comoros, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Namibia and Peru, said that the text
of the draft resolution before the Committee invited
Member States to study carefully the draft proposal
made by the Working Group on the use of mercenaries
as a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
for a possible new international legal instrument
regulating private military and security companies and
also to contribute to the Human Rights Council’s open-
ended Working Group tasked with elaborating a new
convention on the matter.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.30: International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
21. Ms. Gasri (France), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that Andorra,
Armenia, Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Czech Republic,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Honduras, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Madagascar, Malta, Montenegro,
Netherlands, Norway, Panama, the Republic of
Moldova, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Slovenia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Vanuatu had joined the sponsors. She recalled that
19 States had ratified the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance and welcomed the imminent ratification
of the Convention by several other States, particularly
given that the Convention would enter into force
shortly after the twentieth ratification. The date
proposed for the International Day of the Victims of
Enforced Disappearances in the draft resolution,
30 August, had been used by families of victims in
Latin America as a day of remembrance since the
1980s and had since been taken up by civil society and
people all over the world for that purpose. Observance
of that day by the international community as a whole
would be evidence of its will to combat a grave crime
against humanity.A/C.3/65/SR.43
5 10-62889
22. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cameroon,
Iceland, Ireland, Jordan, Latvia, Lithuania, Mali, Niger,
Serbia and Togo had joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.31: Missing persons
23. Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that Andorra,
Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ethiopia,
Guatemala, Hungary, Italy, Liechtenstein, Madagascar,
Netherlands, Poland, Serbia, Switzerland and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the
sponsors. He noted that the draft resolution took into
account the best practices on the issue of missing
persons recommended by the Human Rights Council
Advisory Committee.
24. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Armenia, Bulgaria, Lithuania, Montenegro, Qatar,
Romania and Senegal had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.32: Elimination of all forms
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion
or belief
25. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced the following revisions to the draft
resolution: in paragraph 11 (h) the phrase “individuals
responsible for committing acts of desecration or
destruction” should be deleted and replaced with the
phrase “those responsible for destruction”; and in
paragraph 11 (k), the words “reflect on” should be
replaced by the word “consider”.
26. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the European Union and the
other sponsors, said that Argentina, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, El Salvador, Georgia, Japan, Monaco, the
Republic of Moldova, Slovakia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had joined as
sponsors. The draft resolution built on resolutions
adopted in previous years and highlighted new
concerns, including the continuing acts of intolerance
against members of religious communities and
religious minorities, including by non-State actors, as
well as the limited progress made in eliminating all
forms of discrimination based on religion or belief. The
text also placed special emphasis on the need for
specific laws and measures to prevent discrimination
and the need for non-discriminatory implementation of
existing laws.
27. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Angola, Armenia, Benin, Guatemala, Madagascar,
Paraguay, Peru and San Marino had joined the
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.33: Programme of
activities of the International Year for People of
African Descent
28. Ms. Salazar-Mejía (Colombia), introducing the
draft resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Panama, Peru and Uruguay had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution L.36: Human rights and
extreme poverty
29. Mr. Pérez (Peru), introducing the draft resolution
on behalf of the sponsors, said that Australia, Belgium,
China, Cuba, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Malaysia, Mongolia, Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, the Republic of Moldova, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the sponsors. He
noted that the draft resolution urged States to
contribute to the work of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide guiding
principles on extreme poverty and human rights.
30. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria, Armenia, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Congo, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Georgia, Grenada, India, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Mali, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sri
Lanka, Swaziland, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates and Zimbabwe had joined as sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.38: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
31. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced a revision to the draft resolution. In the
seventeenth preambular paragraph, the word “an”
before the word “impact” should be deleted.
32. Mr. Selim (Egypt), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said thatA/C.3/65/SR.43
10-62889 6
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali
and Rwanda had joined the sponsors. The draft
resolution was a sincere attempt to correlate
globalization with the promotion of human rights by
calling attention to the vulnerability of developing
countries to economic and financial crises and
affirming the need to respect cultural diversity.
33. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Grenada, Lesotho and Uganda had joined as
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.43: Protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism
34. Mr. De León Huerta (Mexico), introducing the
draft resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that
Albania, Armenia, Australia, Belgium, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Ireland, Israel, Montenegro, Peru, Serbia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United States of
America and Uruguay had joined as sponsors. The
draft resolution was based on resolutions adopted in
previous years and included a new reference to States’
obligation to protect the right to privacy. It also urged
all Working Groups of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force to include a human rights
perspective in their work and called on States to
provide effective remedies and reparations to victims
of human rights violations.
35. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
El Salvador, Estonia, Iceland, Mali, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Nicaragua, Paraguay,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had joined the
sponsors.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.12/Rev.1: Realizing the
Millennium Development Goals for persons with
disabilities towards 2015 and beyond
36. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
37. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Norway should have been listed as a sponsor of
the draft resolution.
38. Ms. Maduhu (United Republic of Tanzania),
introducing the draft resolution on behalf of her
delegation and that of the Philippines, said that Benin,
Cameroon, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Japan, Lebanon, Mongolia, Qatar, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia, Uruguay and Zambia had joined the
sponsors.
39. It was important that persons with disabilities
were regarded as active participants and beneficiaries
of development. The outcome of the High-level
Plenary Meeting entitled Keeping the promise, united
to achieve the Millennium Development Goals had
recognized that policies and actions must focus, inter
alia, on persons with disabilities.
40. The draft resolution reaffirmed previous
resolutions, in particular, General Assembly resolution
64/131, Realizing the Millennium Development Goals
for persons with disabilities, and General Assembly
resolution 63/150, Realizing the Millennium
Development Goals for persons with disabilities
through the implementation of the World Programme
of Action concerning Disabled Persons and the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
41. The draft resolution continued to stress the need
for more data and statistics on the situation of persons
with disabilities and information on best practices at
the international, national, regional and subregional
levels for including persons with disabilities in all
aspects of development efforts. The resolution
requested an implementation report with a view to
convening a high-level meeting at the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly on strengthening
efforts to ensure access of persons with disabilities to
all aspects of development efforts.
42. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Colombia, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Georgia, Grenada,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Malawi, Maldives, Mali,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea,A/C.3/65/SR.43
7 10-62889
Paraguay, Republic of Korea, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Swaziland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Uzbekistan and Zimbabwe had joined
the sponsors.
43. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.12/Rev.1 was adopted.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.7 on the declaration on the
occasion of the fifteenth anniversary of the Fourth
World Conference on Women
44. The Chair, recalling that at its forty-first meeting
the Committee had adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.55, paragraph 11 of which endorsed the
declaration adopted by the Commission on the Status
of Women on the occasion of the fifteenth anniversary
of the Fourth World Conference on Women, said that
draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.7 endorsing that same
declaration was accordingly withdrawn.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.18/Rev.1: Supporting
efforts to end obstetric fistula
45. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
46. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the African Group, informed the
Committee that Belize, Belarus, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
the Philippines, Samoa, Vanuatu and Yemen had joined
the sponsors.
47. The resolution was intended to save the lives of
women and girls by addressing one of the most severe
unresolved reproductive health issues and the leading
cause of maternal mortality in the developing countries
in the twenty-first century. The condition, stemming
from prolonged obstructed labour, bore a stigma and
the affected women were often ostracized by their
families and communities. In the mainly rural areas
where obstetric fistula was common, poor reproductive
health care and poverty were part of a vicious cycle
that caused at least 2 million women in Africa, Asia
and the Arab region to live with the condition. Yet,
obstetric fistula was almost entirely preventable with
proper maternal and reproductive health care. The draft
resolution reflected the recommendations in the
Secretary-General’s report (A/64/150) on what must be
done at the national, regional and international levels
to prevent obstetric fistula and end maternal morbidity
and mortality.
48. The text before the Committee should be revised
to restore the language agreed to during the
negotiations: in the first sentence of paragraph 8, the
words “through, inter alia,” should be reversed to read
“, inter alia, through”. In paragraph 9 (h) the adjective
“socio-economic” should be inserted before the word
“reintegration”; and in paragraph 9 (i) the words
“through, inter alia,” should again be reversed to read
“, inter alia, through”.
49. The African Union attached great importance to
the issue, and hoped that the draft resolution would be
adopted with overwhelming support.
50. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Afghanistan, Cambodia, Côte d’Ivoire, Iraq,
Maldives, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nepal,
Russian Federation, Rwanda and Trinidad and Tobago
had joined the sponsors.
51. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the presentation of the
draft resolution as an initiative of the entire African
Group was an important signal of the urgent need to
fulfil Millennium Development Goal 5, improving
maternal health and achieving universal access to
reproductive health, by 2015. All 27 member States of
the European Union had decided to sponsor the draft
resolution because of their commitment to the
international efforts to eliminate obstetric fistula, and
welcomed the fact that a record number of United
Nations Members had decided to do the same.
52. Ms. Sapag (Chile) said that the huge
endorsement of the important text before the
Committee showed that excellent results could be
achieved when the Committee focused on such
important matters as women’s health and such relevant
issues as discrimination and stigma against women
with health problems, or the status of health care in the
developing countries and in isolated areas. The African
Group had been the first to introduce a resolution on
obstetric fistula in years past, when many were still
unaware of the painful condition, and it had now
provided the Committee with a text that could attract
consensus and majority support.
53. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.18/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.A/C.3/65/SR.43
10-62889 8
54. Ms. Murphy (Observer for the Holy See) said
that respecting the dignity of women was key to
overcoming the problem of obstetric fistula, and that
entailed addressing poverty and providing women with
health care. The Holy See of course supported maternal
and emergency obstetric care, the availability of skilled
attendants at birth, and prenatal and postnatal care.
Once again, however, it had reservations about the use
in the resolution just adopted of terms such as “sexual
and reproductive health” if they were misconstrued as
constituting a right to abortion, or as endorsement,
promotion or support for funding of abortion. Attempts
to prevent obstetric fistula by promoting the use of
reproductive health commodities by developing
countries treated women not as persons but as objects
of the agendas of the donor countries. What was
needed was an approach that took into account the
overall well-being of women, which necessarily
encompassed sufficient health care.
55. Ms. Flood-Beaubrun (St. Lucia) said that it was
an individual, community and State responsibility to
ensure that women, regardless of age or socio-
economic status, were able to have healthy, safe
pregnancies and deliveries. Unfortunately, less than
five years from the target date, Goal 5 was far from
achievement, as was the eradication of obstetric fistula,
a tragedy that afflicted more than 2 million women
throughout the world, even though it was entirely
preventable with proper obstetric care.
56. One must ask why safe delivery was still so far
out of reach for so many women. There were many
small developing countries, such as her own, where
although unfortunately poverty and rates of early
pregnancy were quite high, obstetric fistula did not
occur. The reason was simple: St. Lucia provided
adequate medical care for all pregnant women, and
emergency obstetric care for all who developed
complications.
57. The resolution just adopted did not focus
specifically on access to emergency obstetric care as
the single most important factor in preventing obstetric
fistula, but rather made it one of many interventions,
all of them admittedly relevant: and that was a
disservice to women, for that was what worked and
must be made the prime strategy. Her delegation had
joined the consensus on the resolution on the
understanding that resources should be directed
towards addressing the real needs of expectant mothers
through the provision of skilled birth attendants and
emergency obstetric care above all other priorities.
Agenda item 61: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.58: Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
58. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
59. Mr. Lennartsson (Sweden) said that the draft
resolution aimed to reaffirm the support of the General
Assembly for the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and its
executive committee and focused on essential policy
elements.
60. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belize, Benin, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Guatemala, Honduras, Italy, Jamaica, Madagascar,
Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Morocco,
New Zealand, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United States of America, Uruguay and
Zambia had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
61. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.58 was adopted.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.