United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.47
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
9 February 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-60219 (E)
*1160219*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 47th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 21 November 2011, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/66/SR.47
11-60219 2
The meeting was called to order at 10:15 a.m.
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.69/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.69/Rev.1: Assistance to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa
1. Ms. Sulimani (Sierra Leone), introducing the
draft resolution on behalf of the African Group, said
that in addition to the sponsors cited in the document,
Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Japan,
Luxembourg, Switzerland and the United Kingdom had
become sponsors. The draft resolution was based on
resolution 65/193 and contained the usual technical
updates, including new elements to reflect key
developments concerning refugees on the African
continent, particularly in the Horn of Africa and North
Africa.
2. A number of revisions had been made to the text
of the draft resolution. At the beginning of the third
preambular paragraph, the word “Recalling” had been
changed to “Welcoming”. The last line of paragraph 11
had been reworded to read “support the sustainability
of voluntary return, reintegration and resettlement”. In
paragraph 21, the phrase “to intensify their support”
had been replaced by the words “to continue, and
where appropriate, intensify their support”.
3. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, the Central African Republic, Chile, the
Czech Republic, Finland, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Montenegro, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia,
Slovenia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and the United States of America had become sponsors.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.44/Rev.1)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.54, L.55/Rev.1, L.56 and L.70)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.44/Rev.1: Promotion of the
Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote
and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms
4. Ms. Merchant (Norway), introducing the draft
resolution, said that its main goal was to promote the
implementation of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, as well as to support the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur. The draft resolution had been
subject to several informal and bilateral consultations
and many concessions had been made. Several
delegations had demonstrated considerable flexibility,
for which her delegation was extremely grateful.
Andorra, Armenia, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Chile, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Estonia,
Guatemala, Honduras, Jordan, Malta, Monaco,
Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Peru, San
Marino, Senegal, the United States of America and
Vanuatu had joined the sponsors.
5. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Cyprus, Haiti, Mali, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Ukraine and Uruguay had become sponsors.
6. The Chair invited to the Committee to resume
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 69.
7. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the group of the Non-Aligned Movement, said that
she wished to reiterate its firm stance with regard to
the ongoing selectivity, double standards and
politicization reflected in the resolutions on human
rights in developing countries which were members of
the Group. The Sixteenth Ministerial Conference of the
Non-Aligned Movement in Bali had emphasized the
role of the Human Rights Council as the United
Nations body principally responsible for consideration
of the human rights situation in all countries without
distinction. Its universal periodic review was the
appropriate mechanism to consider all human rights
issues without distinction and on the basis of
cooperation and constructive dialogue.
8. At the Bali Ministerial Conference, heads of State
and Government had expressed deep concern with
regard to country-specific draft resolutions in the Third
Committee, which undermined cooperation. The
practice amounted to the exploitation of human rights
issues to suit a political agenda and went against the
principles of universality and objectivity that shouldA/C.3/66/SR.47
3 11-60219
underlie all considerations of human rights in both
developed and developing countries. The draft
resolutions before the Third Committee were based on
the political motivations of certain States and
undermined the credibility of United Nations human
rights mechanisms. She therefore called on all
delegations to vote against any resolution which
targeted specific countries.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.54: Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
9. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
10. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the European Union and the
sponsors, said that the Marshall Islands, Palau, Tuvalu
and Vanuatu had joined the sponsors. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had made no substantial
effort to address the concerns of the international
community with regard to the human rights situation in
that country. If the world did not react, a signal would
be sent that international concern had decreased or that
the situation had improved, which was not the case.
11. The General Assembly could not ignore the
suffering of the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and should, with the adoption of the
draft resolution, urge its Government to put an
immediate end to its human rights violations. While a
negotiation process to address the issues contained in
the draft resolution would have been preferable, the
Government had refused to engage in any discussion.
His delegation therefore strongly encouraged all
Member States to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
12. Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that his delegation unequivocally rejected
the draft resolution as no human rights violations of the
sort described in it had occurred in his country. It was a
politically motivated document that politicized the
issue of human rights and whose aim was to stoke
confrontation. Although his Government reiterated its
willingness to engage in dialogue, it could not
compromise on the draft resolution, which had nothing
to do with human rights and everything to do with
politics. It was a typical example of the selectivity and
double standards that characterized the Human Rights
Council.
13. Human rights violations committed by Western
nations, including mass killings committed in Iraq and
Afghanistan by the United States of America, had
never been brought up for scrutiny, nor had the human
rights situations in many countries which sponsored the
draft resolution been taken into account, including
sexual violence, torture, racial discrimination and the
maltreatment of immigrants and indigenous peoples. In
addition developing countries had been coerced into
sponsoring the draft resolution through economic
pressure in the form of aid.
14. Since the draft resolution was the product of
political manipulation and pressure, it could never be
an accurate reflection of the will of the international
community. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea would never accept it even if it were adopted.
His delegation requested a vote on the draft resolution
and thanked all Member States that supported his
country’s position.
15. Mr. Nishida (Japan) said that the promotion and
protection of human rights were legitimate concerns of
the international community. His country believed that
those concerns should generally be addressed through
dialogue and cooperation. However, there were grave
concerns with regard to the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea which
should be addressed through he adoption of draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.54.
16. The universal periodic review was a valuable
opportunity for all countries to review their respective
human rights situations and to accept its
recommendations. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea had joined the process in December 2009 but
had not yet accepted any of the 167 recommendations
that had been made. It had likewise refused to engage
in any dialogue and constructive cooperation with
regard to the special procedures mandated by the
Human Rights Council. The abduction issue remained
outstanding, with 12 of the 17 Japanese nationals
identified by his Government as having been abducted
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea not yet
returned. His country urged the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to establish an investigative
committee without delay as the abduction issue
represented a fundamental violation of human rights.
17. There was concern that the universal periodic
review was not adequately addressing the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. It was important, therefore, for the Human
Rights Council and the entire international communityA/C.3/66/SR.47
11-60219 4
through the General Assembly to express their
collective concern regarding the human rights situation
in general and the abduction issue in particular. He
urged all delegations to adopt the draft resolution and
hoped that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
would accept its recommendations.
18. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that her country believed
that differences in the human rights arena should be
addressed through dialogue and cooperation on the
basis of equality and mutual respect. It was opposed to
using country-specific resolutions to exert pressure or
to establish country-specific human rights mechanisms.
Politicized finger-pointing could not improve a
country’s human rights situation and only provoked
meaningless confrontations.
19. Her country welcomed the cooperation between
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
UNICEF, the Food and Agricultural Organization, the
World Food Programme and other agencies. It called
on the international community to take a pragmatic and
constructive attitude with regard to the economic and
social development challenges faced by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and provide more effective
humanitarian assistance in order to create a favourable
international environment to promote progress,
stability and human rights in that country. On that
basis, China would vote against the draft resolution.
20. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation wished to express its regret over the
insistence of some States to introduce draft resolutions
dealing with the human rights situations in specific
countries for political reasons. The practice threatened
the credibility of political and legal reference points in
the framework of international relations and
undermined international consensus on the machinery
dealing with human rights.
21. Her delegation wished to reaffirm its opposition
in principle to such initiatives based on the Syrian Arab
Republic’s refusal to invoke human rights issues
selectively in order to interfere in the internal affairs of
Member States on humanitarian and legal pretexts.
Doing so contradicted the Charter of the United
Nations, which affirmed the principle of the sovereign
equality of all Member States. Human rights issues
should be dealt with in the appropriate forum, namely
the Human Rights Council, which reviewed questions
of human rights in all Member States and not in
specific States. The Syrian Arab Republic would
therefore vote against the draft resolution.
22. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her delegation
associated itself with the statement made by the Cuban
delegation on behalf of the group of the Non-Aligned
Movement. Venezuela would vote against the draft
resolution because it opposed the practice of some
States with political agendas to introduce country
specific resolutions on human rights issues without due
respect for the principle of sovereign equality. It was
inconceivable that some countries used human rights as
a political weapon against others.
23. Her delegation likewise deplored the fact that
year after year the majority of countries in the Third
Committee had been subjected to political
manipulation by those countries which sponsored draft
resolutions that pointed fingers at and criminalized
other States. The General Assembly should not be used
for such despicable ends. It was the Human Rights
Council, through the universal periodic review, which
was mandated to examine human rights situations
based on impartial and objective evaluations, and the
Third Committee should immediately end all
accusatory practices.
24. Mr. Chigejo (Zimbabwe) said that, although
human rights had become a universal issue extending
beyond national boundaries, the promotion and
protection of human rights remained first and foremost
the responsibility of the individual States concerned. If
other countries or non-State entities had any concerns
regarding human rights that they believed merited the
attention of the international community, they should
make suggestions or offer assistance to the countries in
question to help them address those issues. However
all such engagements should be undertaken through
consultative dialogue, impartiality, objectivity,
transparency and in full respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of State sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other
countries.
25. The presentation of country-specific draft
resolutions contradicted those guiding principles and
constituted politically motivated attacks by certain
powerful countries seeking to interfere in the internal
affairs of others. They also undermined cooperation as
the essential principle to effectively promote respectA/C.3/66/SR.47
5 11-60219
for human rights. Zimbabwe would, therefore, vote
against the draft resolution.
26. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that her
Government maintained a traditional position against
country-specific resolutions which sought to
selectively accuse countries of the South on the basis
of clear political motivations without any relationship
to the real defence of human rights. Such harmful
practices had been responsible for discrediting the
former Commission on Human Rights and had led to
its disappearance. Only genuine international
cooperation based on the principles of impartiality,
objectivity and non-selectivity could ensure the
promotion and effective protection of human rights.
The Human Rights Council with its universal periodic
review mechanism was the proper forum for the
examination of human rights. Cuba would therefore
vote against the draft resolution.
27. Mr. Gurung (Nepal) said that his country
supported the concerns expressed in the draft
resolution, particularly with regard to the issue of
abductions. It opposed any form of enforced
disappearance as it contravened fundamental tenets of
human rights and called on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to resolve those concerns. However,
country-specific resolutions on human rights situations
should be addressed by the Human Rights Council
through the universal periodic review. There should be
greater engagement in developing thematic issues
through the Council, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, treaty bodies, special
procedures and human rights mechanisms. Nepal
would therefore abstain in the vote on the draft
resolution.
28. At the request of the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea a recorded
vote was taken on draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.54.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu.
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Myanmar, Oman, Russian
Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Pakistan, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal,
Singapore, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Yemen, Zambia.A/C.3/66/SR.47
11-60219 6
29. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.54 was adopted by
112 votes to 16, with 55 abstentions.*
30. Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia) said that his country
believed in a non-confrontational approach in all inter-
State matters, including on the issue of human rights,
preferring constructive and respectful dialogue and
cooperation with the aim of improving the state of
affairs with due respect for the national sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all Member States. It did not
support resolutions targeting specific countries,
regardless of the system of governance of the country
involved. Malaysia had therefore abstained in the vote
on the draft resolution.
31. Human rights should not be exploited for political
gains, including through the selective targeting of
countries, a practice which ran counter to the Charter
and the universal periodic review mechanism. His
country took note of developments in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the challenges that it
and the United Nations both faced with regard to the
recommendations put forward in the universal periodic
review of the Human Rights Council. It hoped that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and United
Nations could agree on a solution with regard to the
work of the Special Rapporteur.
32. Mr. Khan (Indonesia) said that his country
wished to express its full support for the work of the
international community in protecting and promoting
human rights. It believed however that such efforts
should be based on mutual respect and genuine
international dialogue and cooperation. One of the
main reasons for the reform of the human rights
mechanism, and particularly for the creation of the
Human Rights Council, had been to allow for a non-
politicized and more credible consideration of country-
specific situations.
33. The universal periodic review of the Human
Rights Council provided a mechanism for assessing the
human rights situation in all Member States on an
equal basis. It was of the utmost importance that it
should be optimized in order to eliminate selectivity,
double standards and politicization. Indonesia had
therefore been unable to support the draft resolution.
Nevertheless it recognized that the draft resolution
reflected unresolved issues in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and hoped that due consideration
would be given to the issues that it addressed.
Indonesia had therefore abstained in the vote on the
draft resolution.
34. Mr. de Sellos (Brazil) said that his country’s
support for the draft resolution reflected its concern
over the lack of engagement and cooperation between
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
United Nations human rights system. However the vote
should not be understood as a condemnation but rather
as encouragement to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to strengthen its cooperation with the
international human rights system. His country had
taken note of the positive developments with respect to
cooperation with United Nations agencies, particularly
in the humanitarian field. Support from the
international community for the humanitarian efforts in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was
essential, and all Member States were urged to provide
assistance.
35. In spite of those positive developments, his
country noted with concern the reports of the
Secretary-General and the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, particularly with regard to the issue
of the abduction of Japanese citizens. Full cooperation
with relevant authorities was urged in order to resolve
the situation, including by allowing for the immediate
return of the abductees. Action should also be taken to
resume the process of family reunification along the
border. It was unfortunate that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea had not clarified its position with
respect to the recommendations made in the universal
periodic review, and he urged the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to cooperate with all relevant
United Nations human rights bodies, including the
Special Rapporteur.
36. Ms. Velichko (Belarus) said that her country
wished to endorse the statement made by Cuba on
behalf of the group of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Belarus had always opposed country-specific
resolutions. The General Assembly and the Third
Committee should not serve as platforms for such
resolutions as they undermined the role of the Human
Rights Council as an objective mechanism for
addressing human rights issues. The draft resolution
under consideration was selective and politically
motivated. No country had an ideal human rights
situation, and pointing out faults in others was
* The delegation of Fiji subsequently informed the
Committee that it had intended to vote in favour of the
draft resolution.A/C.3/66/SR.47
7 11-60219
ultimately counterproductive. Belarus therefore had
voted against the draft resolution.
37. Ms. Phommachanh (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) said that her delegation shared the common
view of the Non-Aligned Movement that country-
specific resolutions would not help to address human
rights issues. Only the Human Rights Council and the
universal periodic review mechanism were acceptable
platforms to address the issue of human rights
objectively and without prejudice. Her country had
therefore abstained from voting on the draft resolution.
38. Ms. Nguyen Cam Linh (Viet Nam) said that her
delegation had voted against the draft resolution due to
its principled position of not supporting resolutions on
the human rights situations in specific countries.
Constructive dialogue, positive engagement and
cooperation were the only appropriate and effective
solutions to address human rights issues, including
through the Human Rights Council and the universal
periodic review. Her country shared the concern
expressed in the draft resolution with respect to
abductions, and extended its sympathy to the victims
with the hope that the issue could be resolved.
39. Mr. Swe (Myanmar) said that it was inappropriate
to address the issue of human rights in any specific
country in the Committee. The universal periodic
review of the Human Rights Council was the best
mechanism to consider the human rights situations in
all countries. The sponsors of the draft resolution
should rather offer countries constructive advice and
support through the universal periodic review process.
Myanmar therefore had voted against the draft
resolution.
40. Ms. Ruin (Costa Rica) said that her country’s
concern for human rights situations in specific
countries as reflected in the draft resolutions before the
Committee had prompted her delegation to vote in
favour of two of them. At the same time, it maintained
its position of principle to vote against all mentions of
non-action because it prevented the international
community from examining issues of interest which
Member States would like to examine, including
actions taken by countries to improve their human
rights situations. Nevertheless, as the Human Rights
Council was the main body with the competence to
examine human rights issues, country-specific
resolutions should not be referred to the Committee.
Systematic abuses of human rights should be subject to
examination, but that examination should be guided by
constructive dialogue.
41. Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that his delegation was deeply concerned
by the escalation represented by the adoption of the
draft resolution. Problems, including human rights
issues, should be solved through negotiation and
dialogue, which was incompatible with political
pressure. While the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea was prepared to engage in dialogue, it could not
compromise in the face of a confrontational approach.
It therefore rejected the draft resolution while thanking
those delegations which had voted in support of his
country’s position. Finally, his delegation insisted that
the crimes against humanity committed by Japan
against the Korean people in the past should be
addressed by the Committee before it undertook any
further consideration of country-specific human rights
resolutions. Until that happened, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea was under no obligation to
discuss its human rights situation.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.55/Rev.1: Situation of
human rights in Myanmar
42. The Chair drew attention to the programme
budget implications of draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.55
contained in document A/C.3/66/L.70, which also
applied to draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.55/Rev.1.
43. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking on behalf of
the European Union and the sponsors, said that Israel
had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. The
international community had long been concerned by
the human rights situation in Myanmar. While those
concerns remained and were reflected in the draft
resolution before the Committee, some important steps
had been taken recently by the Government of
Myanmar with respect to national reconciliation and
the human rights situation.
44. Bilateral consultations had been held with
interested delegations and the Government concerned
throughout the drafting process, and those discussions
had resulted in some revisions of the draft text,
including in the fifth and twelfth preambular
paragraphs and in recognition of the progress made
with respect to Myanmar’s cooperation with the
international community. While the sponsors of the
draft resolution would have preferred a consensual
approach, agreement could not be reached and a voteA/C.3/66/SR.47
11-60219 8
would be called for. The European Union and all the
sponsors would vote in favour, and he urged all
delegations to do likewise.
45. Mr. Swe (Myanmar) said that his Government
was striving to build a democratic society based on the
agenda set out by the President upon his inauguration
earlier that year. Implementation of the new policy
guidelines, which included engagement with
international and regional organizations, had resulted
in the designation of Myanmar as the 2014 Chair of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) at
the recent ASEAN Summit. His Government had also
been receiving dignitaries from States from around the
world and delegations from the United Nations and the
European Union. In addition, for the first time in over
50 years, the United States Secretary of State would be
visiting Myanmar in the coming weeks. His
Government was clearly committed to strengthening
cooperation with the international community and
building a democratic State.
46. Both the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on Myanmar and the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar had made
several visits that year and had been accorded full
cooperation. Moreover, in response to an invitation
from the President, the Secretary-General would be
visiting the country within the coming months.
Myanmar had undergone the universal periodic review
process of the Human Rights Council and was working
to implement many of the resulting recommendations.
The National Human Rights Commission, composed of
independent experts, had been recently established and
was already accepting complaints of violations. In
addition, in order to promote national reconsolidation
efforts, the Government had granted amnesty to
prisoners, reinstated the National League for
Democracy as a legal political party and was holding
talks with the remaining armed groups to end armed
conflicts.
47. Those were just some of the constructive
measures taken during the past eight months. The
Government remained committed to continuing the
reform process within its capacity and resources. In
those early stage of democratic reform, Myanmar
deserved the understanding and sincere encouragement
of the international community, not the negative
approach embodied in the draft resolution under
consideration. While the text did reflect some of the
positive developments in the country, it failed to reflect
the entire situation on the ground. His delegation
deeply regretted that the main sponsor had still chosen
in paragraph 1 to use language expressing grave
concern “about the ongoing systematic violations of
human rights and fundamental freedoms of the people
of Myanmar”, which was evidence of the European
Union’s determination to continue to exploit human
rights and target specific countries for political
purposes.
48. Such use of double standards, partiality and
selectivity in itself constituted a violation of human
rights in the context of international relations. Given
that the universal periodic review process was the
effective mechanism used to evaluate the human rights
situation of all countries on an equal basis, such
politically motivated resolutions had no place within
the General Assembly. He appealed to Member States
to stand in solidarity with Myanmar as a matter of
principle and vote against the draft resolution.
49. Mr. Budak (Turkey) said that his delegation
welcomed the important steps taken by the
Government of Myanmar to strengthen the
international community’s confidence in the reform
process. It hoped that actions to further open the
political environment would continue.
50. Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea), speaking in explanation of vote before the
voting, said that his delegation firmly believed that
human rights matters in a given State could not be
resolved through the interference of other States. The
human rights mechanisms of the United Nations were
the appropriate means to address such issues without
undermining trust between partners. In line with the
traditional position of the Non-Aligned Movement, his
delegation would vote against the draft resolution.
51. Mr. Amit Kumar (India) said that experience had
shown that country-specific resolutions were
counterproductive and his delegation would therefore
vote against the draft resolution. Every State should be
encouraged and have access to robust mechanisms to
address human rights violations. He urged the sponsors
not to pursue such draft resolutions and instead
recognize the significant economic and political
reforms enacted by the Government of Myanmar. A
more productive way forward would be to seek to
engage the Government in collaborative partnerships.
52. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her Government wasA/C.3/66/SR.47
9 11-60219
firmly committed to the principles of non-interference
and respect for sovereignty and would vote against the
draft resolution, which politicized the protection of
human rights and ran contrary to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Human Rights
Council was the most appropriate body for addressing
human rights situations through a process of dialogue
and objective examination. It was unacceptable that the
sponsors were using human rights issues to stigmatize
particular States, as they lacked any moral authority.
Her delegation called for an end to that practice.
53. Mr. Srivali (Thailand) said that his delegation
would abstain from voting based on its long-held
position that the advancement of human rights should
be pursued through constructive engagement rather
than through General Assembly resolutions. In
addition, it should be noted that Myanmar had
undergone the universal period review process, which
was the most appropriate forum for discussing human
rights situations in a non-discriminatory manner. His
Government was encouraged by the steps taken by the
Government of Myanmar towards national
reconciliation, including the establishment of a human
rights commission. Thailand had supported Myanmar’s
bid for Chairmanship of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) in the hope that it would
continue its momentum towards reform. As Myanmar’s
neighbour, Thailand also stood ready to lend its support
bilaterally and within the ASEAN context.
54. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that her
delegation would vote against the draft resolution
based on its opposition to measures that selectively
targeted Southern States. The universal period review
process was the appropriate means for considering
human rights situations, on the basis of dialogue and
cooperation.
55. At the request of the representative of Myanmar, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/66/L.55/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium,
Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Against:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, India, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Indonesia, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, South Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Zambia.
56. Draft resolution A/C.3/L.55/Rev.1 was adopted by
98 votes to 25, with 63 abstentions.A/C.3/66/SR.47
11-60219 10
57. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) said that her delegation
regretted that some States had chosen to advance a
draft resolution against Myanmar within the Third
Committee. Cooperation and dialogue were the best
way to address human rights situations. Through the
positive measures that it had taken to promote national
reconciliation, the Government of Myanmar had shown
that such dialogue was possible. As a neighbouring
State, her Government wished to see economic
progress and stability in Myanmar.
58. Mr. Khan (Indonesia) said that his Government
had been a supporter of the Secretary-General’s good
offices mission in Myanmar, both bilaterally and
within ASEAN. His delegation was heartened to note
that the new Myanmar Government had begun to
implement the reform measures which it had outlined
earlier that year, in particular the establishment of a
human rights commission. The fact that Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi had been allowed to engage in high-level
dialogue was also a source of encouragement. While
his delegation supported the united message contained
in the draft resolution which called for further steps
towards a democratic transition, it regretted that the
main sponsor had missed opportunities to better reflect
the positive progress made in Myanmar.
59. A more constructive approach would have
recognized the enormity of the task of making a
peaceful transition towards democracy. He recalled the
Secretary-General’s repeated calls for united support
from the international community as the means to
encourage the Government of Myanmar. The universal
periodic review process provided a more realistic
mechanism for assessing the human rights situation in
all Member States. On the basis of those
considerations, his delegation had abstained from
voting.
60. Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia) said that his delegation
welcomed the positive developments towards national
reconciliation in Myanmar. The international
community should enhance its engagement with the
Government of Myanmar rather than exploiting human
rights for political purposes. A non-confrontational
approach must be adopted in all inter-State matters. His
delegation had therefore abstained from voting. He
urged Member States to take advantage of the universal
periodic review process to address the human rights
questions in given States. His Government looked
forward to the reforms planned in Myanmar, which
would transform it into a more prosperous neighbour,
and urged the Government to cooperate with Secretary-
General’s good offices mission.
61. Ms. Nguyen Cam Linh (Viet Nam) said that, as a
neighbouring State, her country had been closely
following the developments in Myanmar. She
commended the States that had urged the international
community to support the national reconciliation
process. It was hoped that the Government of Myanmar
would maintain its momentum and achieve peace and
prosperity. The inclusion by the sponsors of some
positive elements within the draft resolution that year
should be seen as an indication that cooperation was
the only effective means to resolving the situation in
Myanmar. Her delegation did not support the use of
country-specific resolutions and had voted against the
draft resolution.
62. Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana) said that his
delegation had voted in favour of the draft resolution
for a number of reasons. The commitments to reform
set out by the President of Myanmar, the release of
some political prisoners and the opening of a
democratic process, were welcome signs that a credible
and efficient system of government was under
development. It was in the national interest of the
Government to seize the opportunity to achieve durable
peace and unity. Its re-engagement with the
international community and the United Nations
system was also an encouraging development.
63. However, his Government remained concerned
about the remaining human rights issues in the country,
as set out in the Secretary-General’s reports, including
armed conflicts among ethnic groups, the continued
detention of political prisoners and concerns regarding
the availability and accessibility of education and
health care. He urged the Government to demonstrate
its willingness to address those issues and offered his
own Government’s support in promoting and
protecting of human rights.
64. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that his Government
welcomed the steps taken by Myanmar to promote
human rights and advance the transition to democracy
and encouraged increased efforts in that direction. The
participation of Myanmar in the universal periodic
review process earlier that year was also a particularly
encouraging sign of renewed dialogue with the United
Nations system. The international community should
strengthen its cooperation with the MyanmarA/C.3/66/SR.47
11 11-60219
authorities to support national reconciliation and
ensure the enjoyment of human rights in the country.
65. However, many human rights issues remained to
be addressed, including the situation of ethnic
minorities and the detention of prisoners of conscience,
which was a matter of particular concern to his
Government. While the release of some detainees was
a welcome development, there were discrepancies
between sources in terms of the number of remaining
prisoners. He urged the relevant parties to investigate
and provide accurate numbers to prevent any
misunderstandings. He also called on the Government
to investigate the reports of sexual violence committed
by members of the armed forces and offer reparation to
the victims. His delegation took note that ASEAN had
expressed optimism concerning the future of Myanmar
and called on the proponents of the draft resolution to
respond in a manner compatible with progress made
when considering the human rights situation in a
country.
66. Mr. Kodama (Japan) said that his delegation
supported the international community’s call for
further measures to improve the human rights situation
and promote democracy in Myanmar and had therefore
voted in favour of the draft resolution. It had proposed
amendments acknowledging progress towards national
reconciliation in order to balance the text and was
pleased that they had been included. He welcomed the
Government’s amendment of the law on political
parties and the restoration of the National League for
Democracy, which would result in more fair and open
elections. It was hoped that the Government would
address the outstanding human rights issues, including
by releasing the remaining political prisoners.
67. Mr. Ang Choo Pin (Singapore) said that his
delegation disagreed with the adoption of country-
specific draft resolutions as a matter of principle, as
they were politically motivated and divisive. The
universal periodic review process had been developed
precisely to address human rights issues. His
delegation had therefore abstained in the vote and
would take that position in any future votes on similar
draft resolutions. His Government welcomed the
positive changes that had taken place in Myanmar,
which would help integrate the country into the global
community.
68. Mr. Swe (Myanmar) said that his delegation had
requested a vote pursuant to the principled stance of
the Non-Aligned Movement against country-specific
resolutions. The draft resolution had been introduced at
a time when his Government was strengthening its
cooperation with the international community. Reports
issued by high-level United Nations officials had noted
positive outcomes of their missions in Myanmar and
had underscored the need for a constructive approach.
The draft resolution only served to undermine trust
between his Government and potential partners.
69. No State could claim a perfect human rights
record; Member States should therefore oppose
measures that embodied double standards in that
regard. His Government disassociated itself from the
draft resolution and would not be bound by its
provisions. In line with its foreign policy, it would
continue to cooperate with the good offices mission of
the Secretary-General and the Human Rights Council
with sincerity and good will. He thanked those
delegations that had stood in solidarity with Myanmar,
despite the pressure exerted on them.
70. Ms. Horsington (Australia) said that her
delegation acknowledged the progress towards reform
achieved by the Government of Myanmar, including
new legislation on labour unions and greater freedom
for the media. The draft resolution struck a balance
between encouraging the positive trajectory and
emphasizing the need to address remaining human
rights concerns. Her Government stood ready to help
the Government of Myanmar to follow through on its
commitments to promoting democracy and national
reconciliation and safeguarding human rights. The
efforts of the Myanmar delegation to engage with the
text were appreciated, and she hoped the Government
would consider the draft resolution positively, as its
message aimed to enhance the democratic process.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.56: Situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
71. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
72. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Andorra had joined the sponsors.
73. Mr. Rishchynski (Canada), speaking as the main
sponsor, said that the decision to put forward a draft
resolution on the Islamic Republic of Iran had not been
taken lightly. The human rights situation on the ground
had deteriorated since the Committee had discussed the
issue the previous year. The Iranian Government’sA/C.3/66/SR.47
11-60219 12
persistent disregard for human rights and the egregious
nature of its violations warranted the attention of the
General Assembly. The Secretary-General’s report on
the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran (A/66/361) had noted an intensification of human
rights violations, and the situation had even led the
Human Rights Council to appoint a Special Rapporteur
to report on human rights conditions in the country.
However, the Government had not permitted the
Special Rapporteur to make a visit and carry out his
mandate.
74. The sponsors had made an effort to accurately
reflect in the text the developments over the past year.
The draft resolution called on the Government to
release those who had been arbitrarily detained and
cooperate with the mandate of the Special Rapporteur.
As the only body responsible for international human
rights issues within the General Assembly, the
Committee had an obligation to hold the Government
accountable for the very serious human rights
violations and provide a voice for the Iranian people.
Lastly, he pointed out that in paragraph 2 (o) of the
draft resolution, the phrase “subjected to torture and
rape” had been revised to read, “subjected to torture,
including rape”.
75. Ms. Medal (Nicaragua) said that the promotion
and protection of human rights were a pillar of her
Government, which supported the international
community’s efforts to protect human rights around the
world. Her delegation wished to reiterate the statement
made by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement concerning country-specific
draft resolutions on human rights presented each year.
The Human Rights Council was the appropriate body
to address such issues, specifically through the
universal periodic review mechanism, which was based
on the principles of universality, objectivity and
non-selectivity.
76. Mr. Larijani (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
in the ninth consecutive year in which the United
States of America, the European Union and Canada had
advanced a draft resolution on the human rights
situation in his country, it was more evident than ever
that such a measure was procedurally unwarranted,
substantially unfounded and intentionally malicious.
The fact that the Human Rights Council had appointed
a Special Rapporteur to evaluate the human rights
situation in his country further justified a rejection of
the draft resolution. The Special Rapporteur should be
given time to prepare his reports without external
pressure of prejudices in order for his mandate to be
relevant. The Human Rights Council had been created
precisely to prevent selectivity, and it should take full
responsibility for pursuing human rights concerns
worldwide.
77. His Government supported the principle of
universality and had itself undergone the universal
periodic review process the previous year. It had also
defended its third periodic report on the
implementation of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights that year. His country had hosted
the most visits from special procedures mandate
holders of the Human Rights Council in the region and
would be hosting the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the coming year. Such cooperation with
United Nations mechanisms clearly constituted
meaningful and genuine cooperation by his
Government and provided solid grounds rejecting the
draft resolution.
78. The universal periodic review process constituted
the basis of his country’s commitment to constructive
cooperation, as it was an efficient and accountable
mechanism which resulted in recommendations instead
of accusations. However, the process of reporting on
human rights within the United Nations system was
misused. The reports of the Special Rapporteur and the
Secretary-General on the human rights situation in the
Islamic Republic of Iran were unprofessional, biased
and near replicas of one another. The Committee
should not allow such manipulation of the process by
certain countries, which masked colonialist attitudes
and arrogant attempts to dominate his country. The
draft resolution consisted of over 150 shameful and
baseless allegations and was an insult to the institution
of the United Nations as a whole.
79. The States that were ostensibly champions of
human rights were themselves not facing country-
specific resolutions, although they were responsible for
many documented human rights violations. For
example, discrimination against immigrants was on the
rise across Europe, the United States and Canada. No
one could deny the increase in Islamophobia across the
Western world, which had resulted in the violation of
the basic rights of Muslims, while United States drones
regularly killed innocent Afghan women and children.
80. The world was enthusiastically witnessing the
historic toppling of notorious dictators across theA/C.3/66/SR.47
13 11-60219
Middle East, many of whom had been strategic allies
of the United States and other sponsors of the draft
resolution and had enjoyed their support for decades. It
was also revealing that the sponsors were mostly those
who had ignored the Israeli regime’s gross violation of
the human rights of the Palestinian people. It was
especially ironic that Israel, with its appalling record of
war crimes, was among the sponsors.
81. The greatest achievement of the Islamic
revolution in his country was the creation of a
democratic social and political structure based on
Islamic ideology, which had transformed it into a
unique and major democracy in the Middle East, where
positions of power were acquired and lost through the
will of the people. For the West, his Government’s
greatest crime was having rejected secular liberal
ideology with successful outcomes. Islamic rationality
had made precious contributions to culture and social
development, most recently inspiring the popular
uprisings in the region, which were testimony of the
failure of Western values and political dominance. In
view of those considerations, he requested a recorded
vote on the draft resolution and urged the Committee to
preserve the credibility of United Nations human rights
mechanisms by voting against it.
82. Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan), speaking on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), said that OIC was opposed to the use of
country-specific resolutions, which selectively targeted
developing and Islamic countries. OIC Member States
were opposed to any initiative that could lead to the
use of human rights as a means of exerting political
pressure on developing countries. The draft resolution
under consideration contradicted the spirit of
cooperation. The Iranian Government had fully
cooperated with the universal periodic review
mechanism and, in 2010, had acceded to the
Convention on the Rights of Person with Disabilities
and signed the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. OIC regretted that the draft
resolution had been submitted despite the evidence of
the Islamic Republic of Iran’s cooperation with human
rights mechanisms and the positive developments in
the country. He urged all Member States to oppose the
measure.
83. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that his
delegation rejected the interference by any Member
State in the internal affairs of another State under the
guise of defending human rights. The Charter explicitly
set out the principle of sovereign equality between all
Member States. It appeared that some States were
seeking to advance new guidelines that were not based
on consensus or provided for in the Charter in order to
exert political pressure. Cooperation for the protection
of human rights in line with international law should be
based on respect for national sovereignty and a
country’s cultural and religious specificities. He
supported the Iranian delegation’s view that human
rights matters should be addressed within the Human
Rights Council, not the Third Committee. Advancing
such draft resolutions for well-known political motives
threatened the legal credibility of the Committee in the
context of international relations, undermined
consensus on human rights matters, created double-
standards and duplicated the work of more appropriate
mechanisms.
84. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her delegation once
again firmly rejected the condemnation of particular
States based on human rights issues. Country-specific
draft resolutions were an illegitimate means of
engaging in strategic confrontation. The States
sponsoring the texts had committed human rights
violations, but were not facing any such measures
themselves. The Human Rights Council had created
impartial mechanisms that did not single out
developing countries. Her delegation would vote
against the draft resolution and urged others to do the
same.
85. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that the
accusatory tactics employed in country-specific draft
resolutions were the same as those that had discredited
the former Commission on Human Rights.
International cooperation based on the principles of
objectivity and impartiality were the only means to
achieving the effective promotion of human rights. The
text under consideration was permeated by clear
political motivations and her delegation would be
voting against it.
86. At the request of the Islamic Republic of Iran, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/66/L.56.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia andA/C.3/66/SR.47
11-60219 14
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Vanuatu.
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei
Darussalam, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, India, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Lebanon,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Paraguay, Philippines, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, South Africa,
South Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Zambia.
87. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.56, as orally revised,
was adopted by 86 votes to 32, with 59 abstentions.
88. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that his delegation
regretted the fact that requests for visits to the Islamic
Republic of Iran by special procedures mandate-
holders had been outstanding since 2005 and
encouraged the Iranian Government to receive the
recently appointed Special Rapporteur. The restrictions
on civil and political rights in the country were also a
matter of concern. As an advocate for a universal ban
on capital punishment, his delegation would have
preferred inclusion of the issue in the draft resolution.
He urged the Iranian Government to implement the
recommendations resulting from the universal periodic
review process and take measures to abolish juvenile
executions and adopt a moratorium on the death
penalty.
89. The reports of arbitrary detentions and
discrimination against minorities, in particular
members of the Baha’i faith, were another outstanding
issue. His delegation believed that the draft resolution
and the reports of United Nations officials should have
provided a more balanced account of the human rights
situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran and
acknowledged positive steps taken in the areas of
education, poverty eradication and women’s
participation in political institutions. It also remained
convinced that the Human Rights Council was best
equipped to examine human rights situations in a
holistic, multilateral and non-selective manner.
90. Mr. Larijani (Islamic Republic of Iran) said he
was grateful to those delegations that had supported his
position. Those who believed that they could employ
the United Nations as a theatre to flaunt their privileges
would be defeated by the truth. Deliberations on
human rights issues should be free from false
accusations and vulgar insults. It was regretful that the
representative of Brazil, a country with a serious
record of prejudice and mistreatment of indigenous
peoples, had spoken as if he knew the truth concerning
the situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran. Without
protection from such games, the objectives of the
United Nations would not be achieved.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.