United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.42
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
04 March 2010
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-60418 (E)
*0960418*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 42nd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 12 November 2009, at 3 p.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 104: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)A/C.3/64/SR.42
09-60418 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/C.3/64/L.22 and A/C.3/64/L.24)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.27,
A/C.3/64/L.31, A/C.3/64/L.32,
A/C.3/64/L.33/Rev.1, A/C.3/64/L.34/Rev.1,
A/C.3/64/L.41/Rev.1, A/C.3/64/L.45,
A/C.3/64/L.46 and A/C.3/64/L.48)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.22: International
Covenants on Human Rights
1. Ms. Fröberg (Finland) said that her delegation
would vote in favour of the draft resolution and
expressed the hope that other delegations would
overcome their differing views and do so as well.
2. Ms. Melon (Argentina), speaking on a point of
order, asked which delegation had requested a recorded
vote on draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.22.
3. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that, in accordance with rule 130 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, a recorded vote
was taken on proposals to which one or more
amendments had been made.
4. Ms. Kondolo (Zambia), speaking on behalf of the
African Group, said that as the amendments to
paragraph 10 proposed by the Group had not been
taken on board, it would abstain from voting on the
draft resolution.
5. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.22.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States
of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
6. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.22, as orally revised
and amended, was adopted by 111 votes to none, with
66 abstentions.
7. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his country had voted in favour of the draft resolution
with the express understanding that it did not imply
that States must become parties to instruments to whichA/C.3/64/SR.42
3 09-60418
they were not a party or implement obligations under
human rights instruments to which they were not a
party.
8. Mr. Saripudin (Indonesia) expressed regret at
the Committee’s failure to adopt the resolution by
consensus, as it had done in previous years. Indonesia
had voted in favour of the draft resolution and the
proposed amendments thereto, believing that dialogue,
consensus and universal support, which served to
broaden ownership of human rights norms, standards
and mechanisms, were the best means of promoting
and protecting human rights.
9. Mr. Bahreini (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
while his delegation supported the essence of the draft
resolution, it had abstained from the vote due to the
references in paragraphs 9 and 10 to General Comment
33 of the Human Rights Committee and General
Comment 20 of the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, with which it had conceptual
differences. Given the Third Committee’s amendment
of paragraph 9, but not paragraph 10, the issue had not
been resolved fully.
10. Mr. De León Huerta (Mexico) underscored his
country’s support for the work of human rights
mechanisms. Mexico had voted against the proposed
amendments, as it would have preferred retention of
the original contents, including the reference to the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism, which, in his delegation’s
understanding, had been agreed with the sponsors of
the draft resolution.
11. Ms. Wilson (Jamaica) said that while it would
continue to support the general thrust of the draft
resolution, it would have hoped that paragraphs 9 and
10 could have been eliminated.
12. Ms. Richardson (New Zealand) said that New
Zealand was a strong supporter of the International
Covenants on Human Rights and the independence and
impartiality of the United Nations treaty body system.
Her delegation would have preferred to retain the
references to the two General Comments, particularly
General Comment 33 of the Human Rights Committee.
It had been published online and States had been
invited to comment on it in advance of its adoption. It
was regrettable that it had been necessary to take a vote
on the draft resolution.
13. Mr. Sial (Pakistan) said that his delegation had
voted in favour of the substantive amendments
proposed by the African Group, but given the failure to
adopt one of those amendments, it had been forced to
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.24: Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional
Protocol thereto
14. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
15. Mr. De León Huerta (Mexico), speaking also on
behalf of New Zealand, announced the following
additional sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria,
Bangladesh, Bolivia, Cambodia, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, the Czech Republic, Dominican
Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia, Israel, Lebanon,
Liberia, Malta, Mauritius, Myanmar, Norway, Poland,
the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Suriname, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan and Ukraine. The large number of
sponsors of the draft resolution attested to the
commitment within the international community’s
commitment to protect the rights of persons with
disabilities.
16. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Afghanistan, Albania, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Gambia, Georgia, Guyana, Haiti, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Madagascar, Mali, Niger, Rwanda, Sudan, Swaziland
and Trinidad and Tobago had also joined the sponsors.
17. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.24 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.31: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
18. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
19. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, Burkina Faso,
Chad, Ghana, Namibia and Tunisia had joined the
sponsors. The large number of sponsors reflected the
growing interest in studying the impact of
globalization, including changes in technology,
production methods and means of communication in
the context of the food, fuel and financial crises. The
aim of the draft resolution was to promote greater
understanding of those challenges and a more effectiveA/C.3/64/SR.42
09-60418 4
international response to them. His delegation regretted
the passive approach adopted by the partners, who had
claimed to have fundamental conceptual problems with
the text but had failed to make any specific proposals
to overcome those problems.
20. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada and
Senegal had become sponsors.
21. Ms. Mirow (Sweden), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Iceland, Norway,
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, said that while
the European Union acknowledged that globalization
could have implications for the full enjoyment of
human rights, it could not support the draft resolution
because of the inaccurate generalization made therein,
that, in essence, globalization had a negative impact on
the enjoyment of all rights. Dealing with the effects of
globalization was high on the agenda of the European
Union. The European Union acknowledged that the
benefits of globalization were uneven but believed
nonetheless that globalization could increase prosperity
throughout the world and have a positive impact on the
enjoyment of human rights. In addition, it seemed
necessary to examine the effects of globalization on
particular human rights on a case-by-case basis without
making generalizations. The European Union had
voted against a similar draft resolution at the sixty-
third session and would do so again at the present
session; it respectfully asked other delegations to do
the same.
22. At the request of the representative of Sweden, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.31.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Brazil, Chile, Singapore.
23. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.31 was adopted by
125 votes to 54, with 3 abstentions.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.32: National institutions
for the promotion and protection of human rights
24. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.A/C.3/64/SR.42
5 09-60418
25. Mr. Schroeer (Germany) said that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, India and Thailand
had joined the sponsors. His delegation sought to
biennialize the draft resolution, and requested the
Secretary-General to report on its implementation at
the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
26. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Burkina Faso, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia,
Iceland, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, the Seychelles,
Madagascar, the Russian Federation, Uganda, Ukraine,
the United Republic of Tanzania and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) had become sponsors.
27. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.32 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.33/Rev.1: Follow-up to
the International Year of Human Rights Learning
28. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
29. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) announced the
following additional sponsors: Argentina, Bolivia,
Germany, Ireland, Thailand, Turkey, Spain and
Switzerland.
30. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, France,
Grenada, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Montenegro, Peru and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had also joined the
sponsors.
31. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) requested the
Secretariat to expedite transmission of the draft
resolution to the General Assembly so that it might
take up the resolution at its special session on
10 December 2009, which marked the end of the
International Year of Human Rights Learning and the
sixty-first anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
32. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.33/Rev.1 was
adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.34/Rev.1: Protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons
33. The Chairperson said that the resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
34. Mr. Michelson (Norway) read out revisions to
the text. In line 4 of paragraph 7, the word “their”
should be replaced by “the”, and the words “of
internally displaced persons” should be inserted after
the word “participation”. He announced the following
additional sponsors: Benin, Burundi, Malta, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Poland, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Ukraine and the United States of America.
35. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Ghana, Ireland, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Senegal, Seychelles, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Zambia had also joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
36. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.34/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
37. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that although her delegation had joined
the consensus on the draft resolution, it wished to draw
attention to the tenth preambular paragraph and its
incomplete reference to the provisions of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court concerning
the definition of the deportation or forcible transfer or
displacement of the civilian population as a crime
against humanity or a war crime. Indeed, the internal
displacement, deportation or transfer of civilians was
not in itself a war crime in any context, but only in
certain circumstances. The wording of the tenth
preambular paragraph was therefore open to
misinterpretation.
38. The paragraph also omitted any reference to
article 8, para. 2(b)viii, of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court, under which the direct or
indirect transfer by an occupying Power of parts of its
own civilian population into the territory it occupied,
or the deportation or transfer of all or parts of the
population of the occupied territory within or outside
that territory, was a war crime.
39. Mr. Perez (Brazil) said that his delegation had
joined the consensus on the draft resolution in
recognition of the need to strengthen the international
community’s efforts to provide internally displaced
persons with adequate protection and assistance.
Unfortunately, it had not been possible to find a better
formulation for the fourth preambular paragraph. No
direct links could be established between climate
change and the causes of internal displacement. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change had
concluded that disaggregating the causes of migration
was highly problematic and that estimates of the
numbers of potential environmental migrants wereA/C.3/64/SR.42
09-60418 6
guesswork, at best. The same reasoning applied to
internal displacement. Climate change might
exacerbate challenges that were caused primarily by
persistent poverty, political instability and other
factors, but it was more useful to focus policies on
direct causes. Brazil would continue to work to
strengthen protection and assistance for internally
displaced persons and to address climate change.
40. Mr. Ali (Sudan) said that his delegation had
joined the consensus on the draft resolution because his
Government was concerned about the issue of
internally displaced persons. Sudan’s efforts in that
area included the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons. His delegation would have preferred
the draft resolution to refer to international instruments
and did not consider itself bound by any language or
definition that came from documents that had not been
universally ratified, such as the Rome Statue of the
International Criminal Court.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.41/Rev.1: Protection
of migrants
41. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that, should the Committee adopt draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.41/Rev.1, requirements would have to be
met from within existing United Nations resources for
the Committee on the Protection of Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to
meet for an additional week in 2010. The daily
subsistence allowance requirements and conference
servicing costs for the additional week would be met
within the provisions of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011.
42. Mr. De León Huerta (Mexico) said that
international migration brought cultural and economic
benefits to all the countries involved. The purpose of
the draft resolution was to reiterate the commitment of
the international community to the goal of protecting
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
migrants, while recognizing the special challenges of
the current economic and financial crises, to which
immigrants were among the most vulnerable.
Afghanistan, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Guinea and Turkey
had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
43. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Costa Rica, Jamaica, Lebanon, Portugal, Timor-
Leste and Seychelles had also joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution.
44. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his delegation would join the consensus on the draft
resolution. All States had the sovereign right to
regulate the admission and expulsion of foreign
nationals. They also had to respect the human rights of
migrants in compliance with their obligations under
international law, including international human rights
law. The United States provided substantial protections
under its Constitution and other domestic laws to aliens
within its territory, regardless of their immigration
status.
45. His delegation urged all States to take very
seriously their responsibility to protect the human
rights of all people, including migrants, in their
territories. States also had an affirmative duty to accept
the return of their nationals who had been expelled or
returned from the territory of another State. The
expeditious return of irregular migrants would
contribute significantly to decreased detention periods.
46. Although international law did not prohibit the
detention of persons who had violated a country’s
immigration or criminal laws, the enforcement of such
law should be consistent with international law,
including international human rights law. The approach
of the United Nations to the global concern about
migration should not be sidetracked by undue focus on
bilateral issues that were being addressed through
discussions between the affected States. It was
therefore inappropriate to refer in the text to a bilateral
legal matter which had previously been addressed by
the Committee. The reference to the case cited in the
ninth preambular paragraph diverted attention from the
serious multilateral reflection required and did not
promote constructive cooperation.
47. The United States had a long history of
welcoming immigrants and refugees and highly valued
legal, orderly and humane migration. The 1 million
United States citizens who lived outside its borders
were encouraged to observe all national and local laws
when moving to or working in another country. The
United States welcomed legal immigrants and properly
documented temporary visitors, including workers and
students, and was committed to protecting the human
rights of migrants within its borders.
48. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.41/Rev.1 was adopted.
49. Mr. Bennwik (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, which had joined the consensus,
said that the European Union’s migration policies wereA/C.3/64/SR.42
7 09-60418
consistent with the human rights obligations of its
member States and were based on a global and
balanced approach and on the rule of law. Migration
regulation contributed to the promotion and protection
of the human rights of all, including migrants, and to
the fight against trafficking, exploitation of irregular
migrants and employment violations. His delegation
therefore welcomed the explicit references in the text
to the obligations of States of origin, transit and
destination. However, the draft resolution should be
more balanced. The European Union had a holistic
approach to migration policies and was a strong
supporter of the Global Forum on Migration and
Development. European Union States had hosted two
of the past three meetings of the Global Forum and
would be hosting the fifth meeting in 2011.
50. In relation to paragraph 4 (a), detention in the
European Union was subject to rigorous judicial
review and was carried out in compliance with
international human rights obligations. In that context,
he rejected any inference that such detention might be
excessive and emphasized the importance of taking
into account the obligation of States of origin to
receive returning nationals.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.45: Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures
51. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.
52. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), speaking on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that
States should abstain from adopting unilateral
measures that contravened international law and the
Charter of the United Nations and that impeded the full
economic and social development of the population of
affected countries. Her delegation opposed all coercive
and unilateral measures, including those designed to
exert political and economic pressure, in particular on
developing countries.
53. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that China had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
54. At the request of the representative of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.45.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,A/C.3/64/SR.42
09-60418 8
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
None.
55. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.45 was adopted by
128 votes to 52, with no abstentions.
56. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his delegation had requested the recorded vote because
the draft resolution had no basis in international law
and did not advance the cause of human rights. It was
the responsibility of States to protect and promote the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of their
citizens. The text of the draft resolution was a direct
challenge to the sovereign right of States to freely
conduct their economic relations and to protect
legitimate national interests, including taking action in
response to national security concerns. It also
attempted to undermine the international community’s
ability to respond to acts that were offensive to
international norms. Unilateral and multilateral
sanctions were a legitimate means to achieve foreign
policy, security and other legitimate national and
international objectives. The United States was not
alone in that view or in that practice.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.27: Combating defamation
of religions
57. Mr. Tan Li Lung (Malaysia), speaking on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC),
said that defamation of religions remained a serious
concern and that constructive dialogue was needed to
address it. However, such dialogue could not succeed if
countries were unwilling to engage with others and
accept their views. Aware that the positions of partners
who opposed the text would not change unless the core
issues addressed in it were compromised, OIC had
decided to proceed with action on the draft resolution.
58. He read out oral revisions to the text. In the
seventh preambular paragraph, the word “serious”
should be inserted after the word “Expressing”. In the
sixteenth preambular paragraph, the words “its first
forum in Spain in 2008” should be added after the
word “including”. The line “the second forum of the
Alliance, held in Istanbul” should be replaced with “its
second forum in”, and “on 6 and 7 April” should be
deleted. Lastly, the word “in” should be added before
“2009”. In the twenty-third preambular paragraph, the
word “interface” should be replaced with
“intersection”.
59. In paragraph 1, the words “and the conclusions
contained therein” should be deleted. A new paragraph
11 bis should be added that read “Takes note of the
work undertaken by the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression in
accordance with their mandates defined by the Human
Rights Council in its resolutions 7/34 and 7/36 of
28 March 2008”. In paragraph 25, the word “possible”
should be deleted, and the phrase “and the intersection
between religion and race,” should be added after the
words “defamation of religions”. Lastly, the words
“and steps taken by States to combat this phenomenon”
should be inserted before “to the General Assembly”.
60. The Chairperson said that a recorded vote had
been requested by the delegation of Sweden on behalf
of the European Union.
61. Ms. Mirow (Sweden), speaking on behalf of the
European Union in explanation of vote before the
voting, said that her delegation shared the concerns of
OIC that persons all over the world were victimized
because of their religion or beliefs. The European
Union could not agree, however, to promote the
concept of defamation of religion, as that concept
severely limited freedom of expression and endangered
the very tolerance that allowed people of different
faiths to co-exist. It was fundamental to distinguish
between criticism of religion or beliefs and incitement
to religious hatred. The concept of defamation of
religions was inconsistent with human rights law,
which protected individuals, but not religions or belief
systems. The debate should be based on the existing
international legal framework provided by the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
62. The draft resolution sought to address legitimate
concerns and condemned instances of discrimination
and intolerance against individuals on the grounds of
religion or belief. The European Union was open about
the challenges encountered and invited others to show
similar openness and determination. The European
Union was willing to engage in a constructive dialogue
with OIC and find new ways to address the concerns of
the sponsors. It would continue to support initiatives
that contributed to a comprehensive dialogue, wereA/C.3/64/SR.42
9 09-60418
grounded in international law and took into account the
views and concerns of all Member States. However, it
would vote against the draft resolution and encouraged
other delegations to do the same.
63. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that his delegation, despite its concerns with the
concept of defamation, had tried over the past year to
address the root concerns behind the draft resolution.
The increasingly splintered views of Member States
suggested that the underlying issues had not yet been
adequately addressed. At the previous session of the
Human Rights Council, it had been possible to reach a
consensus on a divisive and connected issue, freedom
of expression. He regretted the early vote on the draft
resolution and the lack of opportunity to address the
problem in a spirit of consensus.
64. All Governments should respect the ability of
every individual to profess and practice their own faith.
Religion was a global phenomenon, a key source of
identity and a powerful motivating and mobilizing
force around the world. Discrimination and violence
could be exacerbated by ignorance, intolerance and
fear of persons with different religions and it was
incumbent upon Governments to model respect and
welcome diversity of religious belief. Governments
could use a combination of robust legal protections
against discrimination and hate crimes, proactive
government outreach to minorities and the vigorous
defence of freedom of expression and religion without
discrimination.
65. The United Nations should highlight the many
examples of diverse communities living in peace and
partnership in all regions of the world. Robust
protections of speech and free and open dialogue were
also an important part of the solution. Hateful ideas,
when held up to public scrutiny, were shown to lack
merit. Respectful and welcoming societies were built
on the basis of open dialogue and experience; they
could not be imposed by laws. It was a central tenet of
human rights law that rights were held by individuals,
not by Governments, institutions or religions. States
should work together to build mutual respect and
tolerance among the individuals who practiced
different religions, without losing sight of the overall
goal of realizing universal human rights for all
individuals.
66. His delegation would vote against the resolution
because prohibiting speech did not promote tolerance
and because the concept of defamation of religions
continued to be used to justify censorship,
criminalization and even violent assaults and deaths of
political, racial and religious minorities around the
world. Contrary to the intentions of most Member
States, some Governments were likely to abuse the
rights of individuals in the name of that draft resolution
and in the name of the United Nations. The United
States was eager to work with the sponsors to address
their root concerns in a spirit of consensus. Meanwhile,
however, his delegation urged others to join it in voting
against the draft resolution.
67. Mr. Vimal (India), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that his delegation opposed
the stereotyping of any religion. The sponsors had
made efforts to take into account the concerns of other
delegations, but the draft resolution continued to focus
on a single religion. All religions faced negative
stereotyping, to varying degrees, and the issue was best
addressed in the context of religious intolerance or the
abuse of freedom of expression. His delegation also
had reservations about linking the issue with racism
and would therefore abstain from the vote.
68. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.27, as orally revised.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,A/C.3/64/SR.42
09-60418 10
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas, Belize,
Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Fiji,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, India, Jamaica,
Japan, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, United
Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
69. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.27, as orally revised,
was adopted by 81 votes to 55, with 43 abstentions.
70. Mr. Perez (Brazil) said that his delegation had
abstained in the voting, despite the many positive
elements in the text. The concept of defamation of
religions was not consistent with international human
rights law, and therefore with Brazilian legislation,
which was based on the protection of the right of the
individual to freely profess the religion of his or her
choice, including the right to change his or her faith. It
would be more appropriate to address the issue in the
context of articles 19.3 and 20.2 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The human
rights challenges identified in the resolution should be
addressed in a context that was not detrimental to the
protection of other fundamental rights and freedoms,
such as the freedom of expression.
71. Brazil was willing to work towards reconciling
the different approaches observed and finding a
consensus text that reflected the concerns of all
Member States. Paragraph 12 of the outcome document
of the Durban Conference was a good example of such
a text.
72. Ms. Lee (Singapore) said that her delegation had
voted in favour of the draft resolution on the
understanding that it applied to all religions.
Singapore, a multiracial and multireligious State,
believed that the exercise of free speech should not
take place at the expense of others. Freedom came with
responsibility and accountability, while defamation
bred intolerance and undermined social cohesion.
Intolerance and ignorance should be discouraged as
States sought to inculcate mutual respect for one
another and harmony. Singapore reaffirmed its support
for efforts to combat religious defamation and
intolerance.
73. Ms. Duarte-Rodríguez (Colombia) said that the
Colombian Constitution protected freedom of religion,
the right of persons to profess and propagate their
religion freely, and the equality of churches and
religious confessions before the law. The media could
contribute to a greater understanding by facilitating
dialogue between different groups. Colombia had
abstained in the vote because the use of ambiguous and
diffuse concepts such as defamation of religion could
lead to unjustifiable limitations on freedom of
expression. The comprehensive definitions of that right
which existed in international instruments were part of
the Colombian Constitution.
74. Ms. Wilson (Jamaica) said that her delegation
had always supported the principles of religious
freedom and tolerance and respected the right of
persons to practice the religion of their choice. The
draft resolution should not refer solely to one religion
as it failed to take account of violations of the rights of
persons of other faiths and religions. Jamaica had
therefore abstained from voting.
75. Mr. Stastoli (Albania) said that his delegation
had abstained in the vote, although it recognized the
value of minimizing unnecessary conflicts within and
among different societies. Unfortunately, some of his
delegation’s concerns had not been addressed,
including the attempts to associate defamation of
religions with racial discrimination.A/C.3/64/SR.42
11 09-60418
76. Albania’s three major religious communities
lived in harmony. Although domestic legislation did
not recognize the concept of defamation of religions,
there was a long-standing unwritten rule to respect
religious sensitivities, including in the media. Albania
fully respected freedom of expression and was
disappointed that it had not been possible to reach a
consensus.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.46: Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights
77. The Chairperson said that draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.46 contained no programme budget
implications.
78. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), speaking on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and as
coordinator of the Movement’s working group on
human rights, introduced draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.46. A draft resolution on the enhancement
of international cooperation in the field of human
rights was presented annually as strengthening such
cooperation was essential for fully achieving the aims
of the United Nations.
79. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.46 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.48: Promotion of equitable
geographical distribution in the membership of the
human rights treaty bodies
80. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that China had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
81. The Chairperson said that draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.48 had no programme budget implications.
82. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), speaking on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and as
coordinator of its working group on human rights, said
that the draft resolution on the promotion of equitable
distribution in the membership of the human rights
treaty bodies was being presented for the first time and
would be submitted to the Committee every two years.
83. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Russian Federation had joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution.
84. Ms. Mirow (Sweden), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, on behalf of the European
Union, the candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey; the
stabilization and association process countries Albania,
Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition, Republic of
Moldova, Norway and Ukraine, said that, while fully
recognizing the importance of equitable geographical
distribution, including in the composition of human
rights treaty bodies, the European Union was opposed
to the draft resolution. Some of the human rights
treaties did contain provisions regarding consideration
of equitable geographical distribution and principal
legal systems, but it was not for the General Assembly
to modify those provisions, nor should it push States
parties to do so.
85. The European Union was strongly opposed to a
quota system as described in paragraph 4 and also
strongly objected to paragraph 6, in which the
chairpersons of the human rights treaty bodies were
asked to present specific recommendations for the
achievement of the goal of equitable geographical
distribution. It was not for the General Assembly to
make requests of the chairpersons of treaty bodies, who
had been elected as independent experts to serve in
their personal capacity. Nor could the chairpersons
consider or recommend a quota system. That issue
could only be considered by the States parties.
86. The European Union regretted the lack of more
constructive suggestions for achieving a better balance
in the human rights treaty bodies without resorting to a
quota system. It was unfortunate that, once again, no
consultations had been convened on the text. The
European Union would vote against the draft
resolution.
87. At the request of the representative of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.48.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-A/C.3/64/SR.42
09-60418 12
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Chile, Timor-Leste, Vanuatu.
88. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.48 was adopted by
125 votes to 51, with 3 abstentions.*
89. Mr. Tagle (Chile) said that his delegation had
decided to abstain from the vote. Although equitable
geographical distribution was important, the main
criteria for selection should be the personal capacities
of the candidates, including their independence from
their Governments. A fixed system of geographical
distribution could affect the impartiality and
independence of the committees. The treaty bodies
were intended to protect the rights of individuals, not
of States.
90. Mr. Perez (Brazil) said that his delegation had
voted in favour of the draft resolution in recognition of
the improvements made to the text, including the new
wording of paragraph 1. The membership of all
multilateral bodies and mechanisms should reflect an
appropriate balance in geographical distribution, but
members of human rights treaty bodies served in their
personal capacity, and competence, experience and
integrity were paramount considerations. The
establishment of quotas might not be an appropriate
way to remedy the current imbalances but it would be
possible to encourage the submission and consideration
of candidacies from developing countries, while
observing the existing treaty provisions.
91. Ms. Melon (Argentina) said that her delegation
supported the principle of geographical distribution.
Argentina had voted in favour of the draft resolution on
the understanding that its recommendations should be
interpreted in the light of human rights law and with
full respect for the independence of the treaty bodies.
The specific provisions of the treaties should continue
to apply.
Agenda item 104: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.11/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.11/Rev.1: Improving the
coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons
92. The Chairperson said that draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.11/Rev.1 had no programme budget
implications.
93. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) drew
attention to two editorial corrections to the text of the
draft resolution. In the third preambular paragraph, the
words “12 June” should read “17 June” and footnote 3
should read “See A/64/53, resolution 11/3”.
94. Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) said that he regretted
that, owing to the insistence of some delegations,
13 paragraphs had been reintroduced from the previous
year’s text because they were, allegedly, “substance”.
Such copying and pasting seemed more like a
smokescreen to conceal collective hesitation. Those
* The delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina subsequently
informed the Committee that it had intended to vote in
favour of the draft resolution.A/C.3/64/SR.42
13 09-60418
who questioned the “added value” of the proposed
global action against human trafficking were
displaying misplaced resolve, as the real object of
attention should be the insufficient participation in
basic international instruments on human trafficking,
the less-than-perfect cooperation of related agencies,
the rudimentary interaction between government, civil
society and multilateral partners, and critical gaps in
the way the international community was addressing
human trafficking. Those issues should be addressed
by practical coordinated action — in the form of the
global plan of action on preventing trafficking in
persons.
95. It was not morally acceptable to pay tribute to the
plight of victims of transatlantic slavery one day and
on another to pay less than minimal respect and
attention to the groundbreaking and unanimous call of
African leaders for global action against modern-day
forms of slavery. The draft resolution, however, had
broken through the convenient and comfortable pattern
of “business as usual” on human trafficking. The
victims of human trafficking deserved better: the
United Nations did its best when it was united.
96. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.11/Rev.1 was adopted.
Statement made in exercise of the right of reply
97. Mr. Preston (United Kingdom), in response to
remarks made by the representative of Argentina
regarding the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands, said
that the position of the United Kingdom on that issue
was well known and had been reiterated in the
statement of the United Kingdom in exercise of the
right of the reply in response to remarks made by the
President of the Argentine Republic in the general
debate at the fourth plenary meeting of the General
Assembly on 23 September 2009. The United Kingdom
had no doubt about its sovereignty over the Falkland
Islands, and there could be no negotiations on that
issue unless and until such time as the islanders so
wished.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.