United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.36
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
25 March 2010
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-58925 (E)
*0958925*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 36th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 2 November 2009, at 10 a.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance*∗
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination*
__________________
∗* Items which the Committee has decided to consider together.A/C.3/64/SR.36
09-58925 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
1. Ms. Kang Kyung-wha (Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights) read out a statement
by Mr. Sengupta, Chairperson-Rapporteur of the
Working Group on the Right to Development, on the
report of the Working Group on its tenth session. That
statement referred to the Group’s creation in 2004 of a
high-level task force on the implementation of the right
to development, the adoption in 2006 of a preliminary
set of criteria for evaluation of global partnerships
which could promote that right, with the aim of
improving their effectiveness, and the establishment in
2007 and 2008, respectively, of a road map and a
workplan for the task force.
2. The Working Group, at its tenth session, had
made two main recommendations to the task force: that
it should submit a new list of criteria along with
corresponding operational sub-criteria for the
elaboration of a set of guidelines in that area; and that
the criteria and sub-criteria should address other
aspects of the right to development beyond those
enumerated for Millennium Development Goal 8.
3. In order to facilitate the implementation of those
two essential recommendations, the Working Group
had also recommended, inter alia, that the task force
should draw on specialized expertise and the
experience of countries in promoting the right to
development; continue to study development
partnerships in relation to technology transfer and debt
relief; and pay due attention to other issues relevant to
the right to development, including poverty, hunger,
climate change and the global economic and financial
crisis.
4. Lastly, the Human Rights Council had endorsed
the recommendations of the Working Group in its
resolution 12/23.
5. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee),
recalling that the President of the General Assembly
had announced that the report on the work of the
twelfth regular session of the Human Rights Council
would be considered in plenary session, announced that
the meeting planned for two days later had been
cancelled and invited the Committee to complete its
consideration of the current items by the afternoon of
the next day.
6. The Chairman said that he took it that the
Committee wished to adopt the proposed changes to its
programme of work.
7. It was so decided.
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(A/64/18, A/64/271, A/64/295, A/64/309, A/64/487
and A/CONF.211/8)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (A/64/18
and A/64/295)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up
to the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action (A/64/271, A/64/309, A/64/487 and
A/CONF.211/8)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination
(A/64/311 and A/64/360)
8. Ms. Kang Kyung-wha (Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights), outlining the
content of the two reports she was submitting under
agenda item 67 (b), said that the first, a report of the
Secretary-General (A/64/309), contained information
received from 9 Member States and 12 organizations
both within and outside the United Nations system on
the new measures undertaken towards implementation
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
including the Durban Review Conference of April
2009, and highlighted the role of the various United
Nations mechanisms and bodies working on that
implementation.
9. The second, the report of the Durban Review
Conference (A/CONF/211/8), was procedural in nature.
The Review Conference had made tangible and
substantive progress in the international community’s
struggle against discrimination and had brought that
struggle to the next level. Immediately following the
Review Conference, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights had established a cross-divisional task
force on follow-up, which had proposed a programme
against racism and intolerance. The General Assembly
should grant the Office of the High Commissioner theA/C.3/64/SR.36
3 09-58925
additional resources required to live up to the
expectations created by the Review Conference and
should endorse the report to give legal status to the
outcome document and to ensure that its financial
implications were duly considered.
10. Turning to the report of the Secretary-General
(A/64/360) under agenda item 68, she drew attention to
the conclusions and recommendations included in the
report of the high-level fact-finding mission to Beit
Hanoun (A/HRC/9/26) and to the follow-up action
requested by the Human Rights Council. She also
referred to the concluding observations formulated by
the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
11. Mr. Muigai (Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance), submitting his
interim report (A/64/271), briefly outlined the
activities carried out over the past year. He referred to
his visits to Germany and the United Arab Emirates,
the various meetings in which he had participated and
the thematic issues addressed. On the subject of racial
discrimination, he said that he welcomed the recent
developments within the United Nations on the
question of discrimination based on work and descent.
He commended the draft principles and guidelines to
eliminate caste discrimination that had been presented
in Geneva in September with the support of the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
endorsed, inter alia, by the Government of Nepal, and
called on States to rally around that document.
12. As for the situation of Roma, he had released a
joint press statement with the Independent Expert on
minority issues and reiterated his call for Governments
to address the root causes of the problem and to tackle
the violence affecting Roma people in Europe.
13. Turning to the issue of incitement to racial or
religious hatred, he referred to his recent submission of
the report on the manifestations of defamation of
religions, and in particular on the serious implications
of Islamophobia, on the enjoyment of all human rights
by their followers (A/HRC/12/38) to the Human Rights
Council. During the interactive dialogue with Member
States, he had noted that the controversy over
terminology relating to the concepts of “defamation of
religions” and “incitement to racial or religious hatred”
was distracting attention from real problems, and he
had recommended reliance on existing human rights
norms.
14. Referring briefly to the interrelated problems of
racism and poverty, he reaffirmed the need to collect
ethnically disaggregated data and, reiterating his
recommendation, called on States to discuss how to
achieve that goal rather than discussing whether to do
so. In relation to genocide, he highlighted the
importance of early warning systems and
recommended that new problems be prevented by
means of country visits, reports and letters with
allegations of human rights violations.
15. Turning to his report on the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 63/162 (A/64/295), which
he had prepared on the basis of information provided
by a number of States on the measures taken to combat
racist and xenophobic practices, he emphasized the
struggle against political extremism, including the
extremism of neo-Nazi and skinhead groups. In that
regard, he invited States to implement international
human rights standards, in particular article 4 of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, but also noted that a
legislative response alone was not sufficient to
eliminate deep-rooted racist mentalities and
recommended that it be supplemented by, inter alia,
training for State agents and media professionals and
the participation of all, including persons targeted by
discrimination, in decision-making. He also
encouraged States parties to the Convention to
recognize the competence of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination to examine
individual communications.
16. In conclusion, he recommended that all States
should acknowledge that racism existed in their society
and should adopt a broad understanding of the concepts
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance in order to take appropriate
measures to fight its manifold manifestations.
17. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia), speaking on behalf of
the States members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC), said that OIC member States
attached great importance to the Special Rapporteur’s
mandate, which addressed one of the most serious
human rights issues of the day. He welcomed the
regular dialogue between OIC member States and the
Special Rapporteur on the issue. Turning to the recent
phenomenon of defamation of religions, which
undermined the democratic and multicultural
foundations of many societies, he said that the
resolutions proposed by OIC on the subject and, inA/C.3/64/SR.36
09-58925 4
some cases, adopted by the Human Rights Council and
the General Assembly called for respect for all
religions and beliefs. Recalling resolution 63/171, the
General Assembly’s most recent resolution on the
subject, he regretted that the Special Rapporteur’s
report illustrated so poorly the correlation between
defamation of religions and increasing incitement to
hatred and intolerance, even though many examples
could be found. Recalling that discrimination on
religious grounds was generally associated with other
human rights violations, he asked the Special
Rapporteur what he thought about the work being done
in that regard by the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Elaboration of Complementary Standards to the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination.
18. Ms. Liu Guiming (China) said that, while the
Durban Review Conference was an important part of
the international community’s efforts to combat racism
since 2001, follow-up to the Review Conference was
even more important. She asked what could be done to
ensure that States followed up on the outcome
document of the Review Conference and translated
their commitments into action. Noting the interest
taken by the Special Rapporteur in such issues as racial
and religious hatred, Islamophobia and defamation of
religions since his previous report, she invited him to
share his conclusions and asked him to recommend
ways of preventing violence on religious grounds.
19. Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran)
welcomed the work being done in Geneva by the Ad
Hoc Committee on Complementary Standards. Such
work should complement the measures adopted by the
international community at the Durban Review
Conference. It was important to preserve the integrity
of the Special Rapporteur’s mandate, as adopted by the
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council,
throughout the entire process of preparing his reports
for the various United Nations bodies. He asked what
steps could be taken at the national and international
levels to prevent the momentum generated by the
Review Conference from dying out and what States
could do to honour their commitments. Lastly, it must
be ensured that the Ad Hoc Committee’s discussions
remained limited to racism-related issues and to the
objectives of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action and of the outcome document of the Review
Conference. In that regard, he asked the Special
Rapporteur what he intended to do should the Ad Hoc
Committee stray outside its mandate.
20. Mr. Muita (Kenya) said that freedom of
expression could be an obstacle when trying to ban
extremist political parties, movements and groups. He
regretted the failure by certain States to take action to
address the problem. He asked what could be done to
tackle such groups while respecting their freedom of
expression and how the international community could
force those responsible to take responsibility for their
actions should the phenomenon spread.
21. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that her delegation was
pleased to hear that the Special Rapporteur intended to
place greater emphasis on identifying early warning
indicators of violence.
22. In view of the Special Rapporteur’s comments
that respect for human rights standards was the best
defence against manifestations of racism and that
States should not only adopt appropriate legislative
measures but also cooperate with civil society, she
wished to know about best practices on the ground.
Furthermore, in view of his insistence that the various
aspects of human rights were interdependent, she
wished to know whether he intended to participate in
other joint meetings similar to the one in which he had
taken part on the sidelines of the Durban Review
Conference with the Special Rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief and the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression.
23. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that the tendency by a
number of politicians and media to ridicule certain
religious beliefs under the pretext of the right to
freedom of expression only increased prejudice against
certain religious communities. The Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries had asked the Special
Rapporteur, at their meeting of 30 September, to
include in his future reports information about any
jurisprudence that punished manifestations of racial
discrimination and threats against places of worship.
He wished to know whether it was possible to be the
victim of double discrimination, in other words,
discrimination on racial grounds and discrimination on
religious or other grounds, and whether incitement to
hatred was bound to manifest itself in immediate
violence or whether it could also manifest itself over
the long term.
24. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that she was
concerned about acts of xenophobia against immigrantsA/C.3/64/SR.36
5 09-58925
in developed countries. Such acts reinforced racial
discrimination in those countries and encouraged the
demonization of Islam, particularly by the media. She
mentioned, in that connection, the terrorism and
immigration laws adopted by certain developed
countries. She regretted the fact that a group of
countries had withdrawn from the Durban Review
Conference and wished to know more about the
obstacles that stood in the way of combating racial
hatred against immigrants and implementing the
recommendations of the Review Conference.
25. The Reverend Bené (Observer for the Holy See)
said that racial discrimination was nothing more than a
lack of respect for the individual. He therefore
welcomed the Special Rapporteur’s emphasis on
human rights. Education and awareness-raising must
continue to be pursued with a view to changing
attitudes. Respect for the individual would ultimately
lead to respect for beliefs and religions.
26. Mr. Vimal (India) said that the concept of
“descent” did not include that of “caste”. His
Government continued to reject general recommendation
No. 29 concerning discrimination on the grounds of
descent because it lacked intellectual rigour and went
against the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
Moreover, his delegation found the reference extremely
shocking given the history of India, particularly
Gandhi’s struggle against racial discrimination in
South Africa.
27. Mr. Tarar (Pakistan) wished to know how the
increasingly common phenomena of Islamophobia and
defamation of religions featured among the early
warning indicators of violence mentioned by the
Special Rapporteur and whether such phenomena were
social in nature or simply the manifestation of freedom
of expression. He also wished to know how the
recommendations of the Durban Review Conference
could be applied to new forms of intolerance.
28. Mr. Muigai (Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance), responding to the
question about the elaboration of complementary
standards, said that, while the issue was not within his
mandate, he wished to see a gradual evolution of law
based on internationally recognized legal principles.
29. With regard to defamation of religions, he was
convinced that the spread of ideas targeting certain
religions was a form of intolerance and that the
international community, as a community of human
rights, must therefore intervene. However,
consideration must be given to existing international
standards when addressing the issue. If complementary
standards were needed, existing rules must be
respected.
30. With regard to ways of implementing the
recommendations of the Durban Review Conference,
the documents themselves were very clear. He should,
however, point out that, in most of the countries he had
visited, people were unaware, or even denied, that
discriminatory practices existed. If countries wished to
combat racism and xenophobia effectively, they should
be realistic about their situation and tackle the problem
from the bottom up, through education, communication
and dialogue.
31. Extremist political parties were on the rise,
particularly in Europe, where they were tolerated under
the pretext of freedom of expression. Such political
parties posed a serious threat to democracy and peace
and, since most of their members were young people,
were likely to endure.
32. In his view, there was no contradiction between
freedom of expression and freedom of religion. Both
were fundamental rights that were indispensable for the
full exercise of democracy in free societies. A
framework was needed where freedom of expression
would be exercised in such a way that took account of
freedom of religion and the right of individuals to
enjoy such freedom provided it did not harm anyone
else. He recommended that Member States refer to the
outcome document of the Conference held in Geneva
in 2008 under the auspices of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
33. In his view, it was possible to be subject to
discrimination on various fronts and different types of
discrimination could be mutually reinforcing.
34. With regard to the question of caste, he said that,
for human rights to be more than an empty shell, all
human beings must be considered equal.
35. Lastly, he welcomed the cooperation extended to
him during his visit to the United Arab Emirates and
invited other Member States to follow that country’s
example.
36. Ms. Shameem (Chairperson-Rapporteur of the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise ofA/C.3/64/SR.36
09-58925 6
the right of peoples to self-determination), introducing
the Working Group’s fourth report, said that the Human
Rights Council had requested the Working Group to
consult a wide range of stakeholders with a view to
preparing a draft convention on the regulation of
private military and security companies. The Working
Group had taken account of the basic principles it had
established as well as recent human rights treaties. It
had circulated a preliminary draft to some 250 experts,
academics and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) worldwide for comments. It expected to
circulate a reworked draft to Member States in 2010.
37. The draft convention prepared by the Working
Group identified inherently governmental State
functions that should not be outsourced to non-State
entities and invited States to establish a system for
registering, licensing and regulating the activities of
private military and security companies and their
personnel and to force the latter to take responsibility
for their actions. The draft therefore provided
mechanisms for ensuring that the activities of such
companies were subject to national and international
oversight and monitoring and that allegations of abuses
and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law were investigated. Such companies
were concentrated in a handful of countries; it would
be wise to involve such countries in the preparation of
the draft convention. Several countries, including the
United States and the United Kingdom, had already
taken steps in that regard.
38. During its visit to the United States in July 2009,
the Working Group had noted that the United States
Government had taken steps to ensure that the Baghdad
tragedy of 2007 did not happen again and had adopted
legislation and regulations aimed at strengthening
oversight and accountability of private military and
security companies. The Working Group welcomed
those measures. The Working Group had presented the
Government with a list of preliminary recommendations
and had stressed the need to ensure that human rights
violations committed by such companies or by their
personnel did not go unpunished.
39. During its visit to Afghanistan in April 2009, the
Working Group had commended the Government of
Afghanistan for enacting a specific regulation on
national and international private security companies
operating in the country. The Government must now
ensure that the regulation was implemented fully. In
Afghanistan, the Working Group had met with
representatives of a number of local and international
NGOs, all of whom had told him that, rather than
generating a feeling of security for the Afghan
population, the large presence of armed private guards
created a climate of fear and insecurity.
40. The United Kingdom had launched a nationwide
consultation on a Government proposal to introduce a
package of measures designed to improve standards of
behaviour of military firms and private security
companies in that country, based on both
self-regulation and the promotion of international
norms. In addition, the Government would cooperate
by building on the Montreux Document on Private
Military and Security Companies and by working to set
accepted international standards for the companies
concerned. It would also support the establishment of
an impartial and transparent complaint mechanism.
41. The Working Group felt that the recent
consultation was a step in the right direction, but that
self-regulation was not sufficient and that it would be
necessary to supplement it with the establishment of an
international legal framework and national legislative
measures.
42. With regard to the issue of mercenaries, the
Working Group verified the information that it
received on mercenaries operating as free agents.
Although the phenomenon was less common than it
had been in the 1980s and 1990s, it did still exist and
must be taken into account. The Working Group
strongly recommended that States which had not yet
done so should ratify the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries as soon as possible.
43. The Working Group had recently convened its
third regional consultation on traditional and new
forms of mercenary activities and on the activities of
private military and security companies and their
effects on the enjoyment of human rights in Bangkok
with the participation of 15 countries from the region.
The purpose had been to get an idea of the local
situation and to consider the fundamental question of
the role of the State as holder of the monopoly on the
legitimate use of force. The last two consultations
should take place in 2010.
44. The Working Group believed that Member States
should engage in efforts parallel to those of the
Working Group to establish higher standards and set up
human rights protection mechanisms. It urged States toA/C.3/64/SR.36
7 09-58925
respect their obligations under international human
rights law.
45. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that she was
gratified that the Working Group had continued the
work begun by the previous Rapporteur and reaffirmed
the importance of strengthening the legal framework
related to mercenaries. All States should take the
necessary measures to pass legislation in that area.
Cuba condemned those countries which had concluded
agreements granting legal immunity to private military
and security companies. There were certain functions
which were the exclusive domain of the State and
should not be outsourced, such as direct participation
in hostilities and handling prisoners of war or
terrorists. To Cuba, there was a close connection
between terrorism and mercenary activity, and it would
be advisable for Member States to make provisions for
transparent legal mechanisms, including the extradition
of the guilty. In that regard, the Cuban delegation
wished to know if the Working Group had information
on the Cuban terrorist who was at large in the United
States and whose actions, including the destruction of a
Cuban airliner in mid-flight, constituted mercenary
activities.
46. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) also recommended that
private military and security companies should develop
a code of conduct appropriate to their sector. He
thanked the Chairperson-Rapporteur for her active
participation in the conference held at Nyon,
Switzerland and encouraged her to continue her
cooperation with his country. He asked how the
Working Group intended to promote the broadest
possible acceptance of the draft international
convention on private military and security companies
and what role those entities could play in efforts to
avoid outsourcing State functions.
47. Ms. Shameem (Chairperson-Rapporteur of the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right of peoples to self-determination), responding
to the representative of Cuba, said that she had recently
made an official visit to the United States and awaited
a reply from its Government regarding follow-up to the
Carriles affair. In addition, the elaboration of a draft
convention would follow the process laid down in the
relevant resolution of the Human Rights Council, and
would then be circulated to Member States who could
make comments so that changes could be made and
they could decide about further steps. She hoped that
the draft would be ready in 2010. The consultations
with private military and security companies in the
United States and in the United Kingdom had been
very constructive. The draft convention would have to
define which basic functions of the State could be
entrusted to such companies without violating
international law. It was a matter of knowing who must
assume responsibility for human rights violations
committed by private entities acting in conflict zones
on behalf of a State, the extent to which States could
control the activities which they outsourced and what
dangers total privatization of war could pose if States
did not exercise sufficient control over the activities
which they entrusted to those entities.
48. Mr. Ahmed (Sudan), speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, said that the Group reaffirmed
that the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action were the
fundamental legal framework for the effective
elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. Slavery and the
slave trade, especially the transatlantic slave trade,
apartheid, colonialism and genocide must never be
forgotten and, in that regard, the measures taken to
honour the memory of victims were welcomed.
49. The Group welcomed the progress achieved at the
national, regional and international levels in
conformity with the obligations under the Durban
documents, and General Assembly resolution 63/242
was recalled in that regard. However, the erosion of
liberties since the tragedy of 11 September 2001, and
in particular, the increase in religious intolerance, were
cause for concern. It noted the measures adopted by
Member States, the United Nations system and the
international community as a whole to promote
tolerance and respect for cultural and religious
diversity.
50. The Group welcomed the adoption by consensus
of the outcome document of the Durban Review
Conference, which had allowed the international
community to reaffirm its will to combat racism and
gave renewed impetus to the realization of the
objectives contained in the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action. It emphasized that each State
must uphold the commitments set forth in the outcome
document and regretted the fact that some of them had
chosen not to attend the Conference.A/C.3/64/SR.36
09-58925 8
51. The Group recognized that the effectiveness of
regional and international mechanisms to combat
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance must be strengthened in order to enhance
the synergy, coordination, coherence and
complementarity of the initiatives taken and urged the
United Nations system and especially the Department
of Public Information to enhance the visibility of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, as well
as their follow-up mechanisms.
52. Mr. Bart (Saint Kitts and Nevis), speaking on
behalf of the States members of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), said that the phenomenon of
racism and racial discrimination particularly affected
the people of the Caribbean, who were descended from
slaves. CARICOM was gratified by the annual
observance of the International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave
Trade on 25 March which provided an opportunity to
reflect on the magnitude of the phenomenon in history
and to stress the need to continue joint action
throughout the world to eradicate that scourge. He
welcomed the adoption by the General Assembly of a
resolution on the initiative to erect a permanent
memorial to ensure that that crime against humanity
would never be forgotten or repeated.
53. CARICOM expressed its appreciation to the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) for its commemoration of the
International Day for the Remembrance of the Slave
Trade and of its Abolition and the Slave Route Project,
as well as for its initiative aimed at the restitution of
cultural property to countries of origin. Its work was an
example of an approach which filled the knowledge
gaps about those matters, as the Secretary-General had
stated. CARICOM took note of the work done by the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, which had adopted recommendations
concerning nine periodic reports of States parties to the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, and also took note of
its activities related to early warning and urgent action.
He expressed appreciation to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for coordinating the
annual observance of the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, on 21 March,
and for organizing a high-level panel on the theme,
“United against Racism: Dignity and Justice for All”,
on 19 March. The efforts of the Office of the High
Commissioner to prepare the Durban Review
Conference, through the organization of numerous
events which had allowed non-governmental
organizations and Governments to consider a broad
range of issues, was also appreciated.
54. CARICOM commended the important work being
done by the Human Rights Council and noted the
various resolutions it had adopted at its tenth session. It
welcomed the plan of action adopted by the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Human Rights Council on the
Elaboration of Complementary Standards to the
Convention. It also underlined the critical mandate of
the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and thanked him for his efforts in a wide
range of areas, noting his participation in a conference
on “Human rights in culturally diverse societies:
challenges and perspectives” organized by the Council
of Europe. It concurred with the Special Rapporteur
that there were links between poverty and race or
ethnic origin, that the vulnerability of racial or ethnic
minorities generally had historical causes and that
systems based on slavery, segregation and apartheid
had created structural imbalances that remained to the
present day. It further noted that the Special
Rapporteur had drawn attention to the fact that the
current economic crisis was leading to ethnic and racial
tensions that had an impact on migrants.
55. CARICOM agreed with the Secretary-General
that the outcome document of the Durban Review
Conference created further impetus for the
implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, represented a turning point in
the way the human rights system would approach the
issues and would serve as a model for analysing the
issues within the mandate of the Special Rapporteur. It
reiterated its support for the efforts of the Working
Group of experts on people of African descent and
commended it, in particular, for its work on the
situation of children of African descent. On the
regional level, CARICOM took note of the ongoing
negotiations in the Organization of American States on
a draft inter-American convention against racism and
all forms of discrimination, which focused on the
protection of individual rights, the duties of States and
the development of mechanisms for protection.
56. In conclusion, CARICOM pointed out that the
elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance was vital to aA/C.3/64/SR.36
9 09-58925
civilized global society, particularly given the many
challenges it faced.
57. Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania),
speaking on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), said that its
member States, which had experienced slavery, the
slave trade and colonialism, understood that they must
unite their efforts to end racism and racial
discrimination. It was a source of pride that the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action had been
adopted in the SADC member State that had
experienced the apartheid regime.
58. The Community believed that racism and
discrimination were contrary to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and endorsed
to the statement made by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. All SADC
member States had prohibited racism under their
constitutions and had acceded to international
instruments to combat racism in all its forms as well as
to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights.
The Community agreed with the Special Rapporteur
that legislative measures played an important role but
that they must be coupled with education, intercultural
dialogue and social activism in order to create a society
based on pluralism, tolerance and respect for others. It
acknowledged the initiatives taken by the United
Nations to that end, including the Alliance of
Civilizations and the Tripartite Forum on Interfaith
Cooperation for Peace.
59. Recalling that poverty, political marginalization,
exclusion and human rights violations exacerbated
racism and intolerance, the Community emphasized
that action to combat those scourges would lead to a
more equitable distribution of resources in order to
guarantee social justice and equal opportunities,
particularly in the context of multiple current crises. It
shared the Special Rapporteur’s view that such action
should focus on the links between social class and race
or ethnicity and encouraged all Governments to take
action to redress the structural imbalances caused by
slavery, segregation and colonialism.
60. The Community welcomed the holding of the
Durban Review Conference, which had reaffirmed the
fundamental importance of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, had strengthened States’ resolve
to implement those instruments, had called attention to
certain current problems such as incitement to religious
hatred, the need to protect human rights when
combating terrorism and possible limitations to the
right of freedom of speech, and had also recommended
that the intergovernmental mechanism within the
framework of the Human Rights Council should
strengthen the anti-racism machinery. It also welcomed
the adoption by consensus of the outcome document of
the Durban Review Conference and invited States that
had not participated in the Conference to express their
support for that document.
61. The Community commended the role of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in the process and
welcomed her proposal to mainstream the Durban
documents in the United Nations system, while
pointing out that resources were required for that
purpose. It requested her to support Member States in
their efforts in that area. It also called upon all parties
to renew their commitment to multilateralism and to
reassert the central role of the United Nations in
addressing racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance. Lastly, it reiterated its
commitment in that regard and said that it was ready to
work with the international community to implement
fully the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
as well as the outcome document of the Durban
Review Conference.
62. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Turkey; the stabilization and association process
countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Liechtenstein and the Republic of
Moldova, said that, despite the magnitude of
discrimination in all its forms, it was possible to
combat it without violating fundamental freedoms,
such as freedom of speech, by promoting dialogue and
the free exchange of ideas, raising public awareness of
human rights violations and promoting media
independence. While incitement to violence or hatred
against individuals or groups of individuals was
reprehensible, freedom of speech, one of the
foundations of a tolerant and democratic society, must
never be suppressed.
63. The European Union had adopted many
legislative and political measures to combat racism,
requiring member States to introduce laws prohibitingA/C.3/64/SR.36
09-58925 10
racial discrimination in everyday life, including in
employment, education, health care and housing. The
Council of Europe, the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and many European
non-governmental organizations were engaged in
monitoring, reporting, awareness-raising and research
activities and provided support for legal reform, while
the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights
supported, through data collection and analysis, the
implementation of European legislation to combat
racism and discrimination. The European Union would
not relent and intended to continue taking strong
action.
64. The European Union lamented that the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, which had entered
into force 40 years earlier, was not always being fully
implemented in practice, that some countries still
refused to ratify it, formulating reservations that were
contrary to its purpose, and that others were not
fulfilling their obligation to submit reports to the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
or to implement the monitoring, early warning and
urgent action procedures established by the Committee.
The European Union called for the universal
ratification of the Convention and urged all States to
strengthen their cooperation with the Committee.
65. The European Union welcomed the fact that the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance had cooperated with the Special Rapporteur
on freedom of religion or belief and the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression to anchor
their work in the appropriate international legal
context.
66. The European Union had participated actively in
the preparations for the Durban Review Conference,
whose outcome should serve as the basis for the fight
against racial discrimination, and planned to continue
contributing to the work of the Intergovernmental
Working Group on the effective implementation of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action to
achieve concrete results on the ground.
67. The European Union had yet to be convinced of
the need to adopt complementary legal standards. If,
however, such standards proved necessary, they must
be based on specific elements and correspond to the
recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination. The work of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the elaboration of complementary
standards must be guided by a spirit of consensus and
must not go against existing international norms. The
European Union felt that the international community
should concern itself above all with the current lack of
implementation of the standards contained in the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination and other relevant
international instruments, which explained why acts of
racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia continued
to take place and were not investigated and punished.
68. Ms. Viktorova (Russian Federation) said that she
regretted that, six months after the adoption of the
Durban Review Conference outcome document which
expressed the will of the international community to
act at all levels to combat racism, there were no
tangible results.
69. Given the obligation to remember the tens of
millions of people who had fallen victim to racist
ideologies during World War II, the world could not
allow historical episodes to be overlooked in silence or
rewritten, racist ideologies condemned by international
law to be resurrected and past events reinterpreted to
serve short-term political interests and encourage hate
and racial and religious discrimination.
70. Neo-Nazi organizations were spreading in
Europe, recruiting young people and committing racist
crimes which were presented as manifestations of the
right to freedom of expression and were considered to
be nothing more than violations of public order. Given
those contemporary forms of racism, it was not enough
simply to legislate. Children and young people must
also be educated and trained, and they must study
history. States should, objectively and without double
standards, evaluate the current situation in the fight
against racial discrimination.
71. Mr. Tarar (Pakistan) said that in keeping with its
commitment against racism, his country had
participated actively in the elaboration of the Durban
Review Conference outcome document, which
expressed the collective will of States to combat racism
and denounced new forms of discrimination and
intolerance, particularly profiling and negative
religious stereotypes.
72. Pakistan noted with concern that racist and
xenophobic behaviours motivated by a rejection ofA/C.3/64/SR.36
11 09-58925
diversity had spread and gained new legitimacy, and
that in the name of identity and national preferences,
migrants, foreigners and minorities continued to be
denied their most fundamental rights.
73. Pakistan welcomed efforts to modify standards
and legislation to strengthen protections against
racism, but regretted that they were not being
transformed into concrete action. The elaboration of a
stricter international legal regime was necessary, and
the work of the Ad Hoc Committee on the elaboration
of complementary standards would be especially useful
in that regard.
74. Pakistan regretted that practitioners of one of the
worst forms of racism, the incitement to racial and
religious hatred through the denigration of religions
and negative stereotypes of religions or races, could
take refuge behind freedom of expression and opinion
to attack with impunity the rights of persons professing
a different religion, disregarding accepted international
standards.
75. Ms. Shanidze (Georgia) said that the provisions
of international law must be enforced and respected by
all States, regardless of their size. Those provisions
existed in order to protect the legitimate interests of
those who had been forced from their homes owing to
conflicts.
76. In response to Georgia’s request to protect its
citizens against acts of discriminatory violence
committed by the Russian armed forces operating
jointly with separatist militias and foreign mercenaries,
the International Court of Justice had supported
provisional measures which were binding.
77. While recognizing that the International Court of
Justice was exclusively responsible for judging
whether those provisional measures had been enforced,
her country had submitted factual evidence of the total
failure to observe the Court’s ruling. Forced
displacements of ethnic Georgians from Abkhazia had
been confirmed in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/63/950), and the report of the European Union
noted ethnic cleansing which had taken place in South
Ossetia during and after the 2008 conflict. She called
for a strengthening of the international legal order
through the International Court of Justice and the Third
Committee.
78. Ms. Liu Guiming (China) said that, given the
guidelines set and the gaps which had been identified
in the Durban Review Conference outcome document,
the effective implementation of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action required enforcing a policy
of zero tolerance for all forms of racial discrimination
at the national and international levels, strengthening
international cooperation, preventing freedom of
expression from serving as a pretext for discrimination
and enhancing coordination and communication
between the various Durban Review Conference
follow-up mechanisms, the relevant special procedures
mandate holders of the Human Rights Council and the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
79. Resolutely engaged in the fight against racism,
China was committed to enforcing the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action and had
participated actively in the elaboration of the Durban
Review Conference outcome document. The
Government of China had disseminated the Durban
Declaration broadly throughout the country and was
committed to raising public awareness of the fight
against racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia.
China had incorporated the provisions of the Durban
Declaration into its national development plans and
had duly submitted to the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination a report laying
out policies and measures adopted to combat racism.
80. China affirmed that the right to self-determination
was an important and inalienable right, and that all
peoples living under foreign occupation had the right
to fight for their sovereignty, independence and dignity.
Therefore, it supported the Palestinian people in their
tireless struggle for self-determination and called upon
the international community to redouble its efforts to
find a comprehensive and just settlement of the
Palestinian question and establish sustainable peace
and stability in the Middle East.
81. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that the world
owed a debt to the millions of victims of racism.
Regrettably, some States had not maintained solidarity
with the collective action during the Durban Review
Conference, thereby undermining the fight against
intolerance and racism, which was the very substance
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.
However, it was hoped that they would not refuse to
respect the objectives laid out in those documents.
82. All Cubans enjoyed the same rights, and that
subject remained a priority for the Government of
Cuba. Cuba had submitted a full report to theA/C.3/64/SR.36
09-58925 12
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
pursuant to its obligations.
83. Increasingly harsh discriminatory measures and
restrictive policies were a cause for concern, as shown
by promulgation of new laws and regulations on
immigration that encouraged racism, discrimination
and xenophobia.
84. Regrettably, the Internet and new information
technologies, which were powerful weapons against
racism, were too often used to spread racist ideologies
and for incitement to hatred.
85. She drew attention to the deplorable conditions of
detention of the prisoners at Guantanamo, which were
comparable to those of concentration camps.
86. Cuba called for the immediate withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all the occupied Palestinian
territories, including the Syrian Golan, and supported
the right of Puerto Rico to self-determination.
87. Cuba also requested that such terrorists as
Mr. Carriles be duly prosecuted and that the five Cuban
political prisoners who were heroes of the fight against
terrorism be released from American prisons.
88. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his country, which was founded on diversity and had
experienced the original sin of slavery, was aware of
the misdeeds of intolerance and firmly committed to
the fight against racism. Recognizing that the struggle
was far from over, the Government of the United States
had continued to follow issues of race, ethnicity and
national origin closely. President Obama had just
signed a law against hate crimes, strengthening the
ability of the Department of Justice and local
authorities to deter acts of violence which targeted
people of a particular race or ethnic group, women and
followers of a particular religion and to prosecute
perpetrators of such crimes.
89. He affirmed his country’s will to participate in
building a more peaceful and prosperous world and to
cooperate with other countries and the United Nations
to combat racial discrimination and negative
stereotypes. During the June 2009 session of the
Human Rights Council, the United States had hosted a
side event with representatives of Governments and
civil society to examine the gaps and progress made in
combating racism. The United States had also sent a
delegation to the Durban Review Conference to
participate in the negotiations on the draft outcome
document. Although they had been unable to agree to
support the outcome document, judging the changes
introduced to be insufficient, their determination to
combat racism alongside other countries remained
unchanged.
90. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that the new extremist,
racist and xenophobic movements were often to be
found in well-established democracies for which
respect for human rights was a political and social
priority. Efforts to spread a spirit of tolerance and
peaceful coexistence and to give communities the
resources to adapt to cultural diversity in the current
era of globalization must be redoubled.
91. Unfortunately, some parties seemed to have
forgotten that freedom of expression and opinion went
hand in hand with the spirit of dialogue, tolerance and
understanding. Equally alarming was the fact that some
countries seemed to confound the fight against
terrorism with discrimination against a race or religion,
which could jeopardize implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. States
must work together to address gaps in or an absence of
legal instruments prohibiting incitement to hatred and
discrimination and preventing impunity.
92. In that regard, Egypt attached great importance to
the work currently being carried out by the Human
Rights Council to elaborate complementary standards,
especially as they would contribute to rebuilding
confidence between North and South on questions
related to discrimination. States must, for their part,
uphold the commitments they had undertaken in the
context of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action to allow everyone, without distinction, to take
pride in their culture and their faith.
93. States must strengthen their cooperation to
promote dialogue and mutual understanding more
effectively through educational activities undertaken in
partnership with non-governmental organizations, the
private sector and national associations. Protection of
freedom of opinion was crucial, but as part of such
protection, efforts must be made to prevent
exacerbation of racist sentiments and hatred, and to
encourage the media to raise public awareness of
intolerance and conflict.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.