United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.43
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
24 March 2010
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-61357 (E)
*0961357*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 43rd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 19 November 2009, at 10 a.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 104: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 105: International drug control (continued)
Agenda item 62: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(b) Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women
and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/64/SR.43
09-61357 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.61)
Draft decision A/C.4/64/L.61: Report of the Human
Rights Council
1. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that since the Secretariat had made editorial
changes to the text before the Committee, the
representative of Zambia, the sponsor of the draft
decision on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that were members of the Group of African
States, had requested that the consideration of the text
be postponed until the afternoon meeting.
2. It was so decided.
Agenda item 104: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.11/Rev.1 and
L.12/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.11/Rev.1: Improving the
coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons
(continued)
3. Mr. Mokin (Russian Federation) said that since
the problems addressed in the draft resolution required
joint action and real political will, he welcomed the
adoption of the text by consensus. The Russian
Federation would have preferred a text with greater
focus on specific measures, particularly a United
Nations global plan of action on preventing trafficking
in persons, but welcomed the fact that an acceptable
compromise had been reached and was pleased to have
joined the list of sponsors.
4. Ms. Kondolo (Zambia), speaking on behalf of the
Group of African States, said that the draft resolution
would help improve the lot of victims of trafficking
throughout the world. The Group of African States
welcomed the political will shown by all States, which
had enabled the text to be adopted by consensus.
Mindful of the seriousness of the phenomenon of
trafficking, the leaders of the Non-Aligned Movement,
at their meeting in Sharm El-Sheik, had called for the
adoption of a United Nations global plan of action to
enable Member States, intergovernmental organizations,
civil society and the private sector to coordinate their
struggle against human trafficking, taking account of all
relevant legislation, in particular the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. The
Group of African States welcomed the initiatives that
had been taken in other regions of the world and noted
that the draft resolution would allow the General
Assembly to continue its discussion of the adoption of a
global plan of action, in accordance with resolution
63/194, with the involvement of all Member States and
stakeholders. The Group also welcomed the efforts of
the Secretary-General, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and the Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women
and children, who had encouraged Member States to
combat trafficking even more actively, and the
coordinating role played by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. Victims of trafficking could be
found on every continent, regardless of race or ethnic
origin. The Group of African States was determined to
help them and to put an end to impunity for traffickers,
and urged all delegations to join the struggle.
5. Mr. Chiriboga (Ecuador) said that in 2004, his
country had made combating trafficking a priority,
waged on three fronts: prevention, suppression and
protection of the victims. In 2006, Ecuador had
adopted a national plan to combat human trafficking
and other forms of exploitation, which included
initiatives by non-governmental organizations and
those resulting from international cooperation. Member
States must eradicate human trafficking, which was a
new form of slavery that made no distinctions of
gender, age or social status. People in developing
countries were the most vulnerable to trafficking, since
poverty facilitated both the hunt for victims and their
exploitation. National and regional measures were not
sufficient to address the magnitude of the issue;
Ecuador supported the United Nations initiative aimed
at tackling all aspects of the problem, with the ultimate
goal of adopting a global plan of action that would
enable human trafficking to be combated effectively in
countries of origin, transit and destination.
6. Mr. Bennwik (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidates countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Turkey; the stabilization and association process
countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro; and, in addition, Iceland, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine, expressed satisfaction that the
text had been adopted by consensus. The European
Union was firmly committed to combating humanA/C.3/64/SR.43
3 09-61357
trafficking and to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and saw the increase
in the number of parties to the Protocol as a sign of the
political will of States to combat that scourge. The
European Union was firmly convinced that the
international community must commit to establishing a
mechanism to monitor the ratification and
implementation of the Convention and the Protocol,
and therefore supported the establishment of a global
plan of action. European Union member States had
launched several national and regional initiatives on
the issue but much remained to be done, in particular
with regard to the trafficking and exploitation of
children and in terms of understanding and addressing
the needs of the victims. Combating trafficking and
protecting the victims were two priorities of the
European Union, as reiterated by participants at the
October 2009 Ministerial Conference in Brussels. The
European Union welcomed the appointment of co-
facilitators to start consultations and consideration by
Member States of a global plan of action, but stressed
the importance of avoiding any duplication of other
instruments, particularly the Convention and the
Protocol, and any diversion of efforts that should be
dedicated to their implementation.
7. Ms. Medal (Nicaragua) welcomed the adoption
of the draft resolution by consensus but expressed
disappointment at the lack of interest by some States in
the plan of action, which would however lead to a
stronger and more coordinated implementation of
anti-trafficking instruments. The plan of action must be
based on a broad consensus in the international
community; Nicaragua called on all countries that
expressed opposition to human trafficking to
participate in its establishment.
8. Mr. Michelsen (Norway) said that his country
remained fully committed to combating human
trafficking and supported the Convention and the
Protocol, the main instruments on the matter, without
reservation. The increase in the number of States
parties to the Protocol reflected the political will to
wage that struggle. Norway believed that before
adopting new instruments, the existing ones should be
implemented fully and that implementing the Protocol
was the best way to combat human trafficking at the
global level. In that regard, the Conference of the
Parties to the Convention should have an efficient and
independent monitoring mechanism, and Norway
would work towards that end.
9. Mr. Takashima (Japan) said that his country was
determined to combat human trafficking, a struggle
that required coordination and effective action. The
consultations should aim to determine the most
effective way to combat human trafficking, and the
plan of action was one possibility. Japan would
participate constructively in open and transparent
consultations that took account of the opinion of all
Member States, including those that doubted the
usefulness of the plan of action.
10. Mr. Monterrey Suay (El Salvador) said that his
country would have preferred a text with greater
emphasis on the protection of victims, women and
children in particular, but welcomed the adoption of
the draft resolution by consensus. El Salvador would
have become a sponsor if that had still been a
possibility.
11. Mr. Kidwell (United States of America) said that
the United States of America shared the common desire
to renew collective efforts to confront human
trafficking. Much work remained to be done but the
international community should focus on implementing
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
While more countries had become parties to the
Protocol, the number of prosecutions of traffickers had
gone down by 35 per cent in six years and the number
of convictions remained much too low. Effective
enforcement of laws was the only viable deterrent. It
was worth noting that non-parties could participate in
the Conference of the Parties as observers and that
decisions taken by consensus often included the input
of observers. States that chose not to participate were
not truly committed to combating human trafficking.
The United States of America was sceptical about the
usefulness of a global plan of action and believed that
States should do more at the national level to prevent
trafficking, punish the traffickers and protect the
victims. International coordination should aim to
enable donors and implementers to work with
Governments that had limited resources to achieve that
goal.A/C.3/64/SR.43
09-61357 4
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.12/Rev.1: Strengthening
the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice Programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity
12. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
presented a statement of programme budget
implications of the draft resolution in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly. The technical assistance and advisory
services referred to in paragraph 6 of the draft
resolution would be financed by extrabudgetary
resources. The finalization of the Santo Domingo Pact,
the Managua Mechanism document and other regional
programmes referred to in paragraph 7 of the draft
resolution would be subject to the availability of
extrabudgetary resources. With respect to the request in
paragraph 12, he referred to section 16 of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011. The
request made in paragraph 20 would entail a
requirement for an additional amount of $448,200 in
the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011, including $421,900 under section 2,
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management, for interpretation
at four meetings and the issuance of 96 pages of
documentation, $16,400 under section 16 for travel of
meeting servicing staff and $9,900 under section 28D,
Office of Central Support Services. The amounts
requested under sections 2 and 28D would be covered
by resources allocated to the General Assembly on
dates to be determined in consultation with the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management. Every effort would be made to absorb
the travel expenses of meeting servicing staff within
the appropriation for the biennium 2010-2011. With
regard to the treaty event mentioned in paragraph 21,
any additional requirement should be covered by the
proposed budget resources under section 8, Legal
affairs, and section 27, Public information. The
enhancement of technical assistance for cooperation in
combating terrorism referred to in paragraph 25 would
be subject to the availability of extrabudgetary
resources. With respect to paragraphs 23 and 30,
resources under section 16 of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011 amounted to
$38,258,800 before recosting, which was 1.8 per cent
higher than the revised appropriation for the biennium
2008-2009. Finally, the organization of a high-level
segment during the fifth session of the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime referred to in
paragraph 31 would have no budget implications if no
more than 20 meetings were planned for the
Conference of the Parties. Adoption of the draft
resolution would therefore have no budget implications
under the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2010-2011. He recalled the provisions of
resolution 45/248 B on the prerogatives of the Fifth
Committee and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions with respect
to administrative and budgetary matters.
13. He noted that Andorra should be replaced by
Algeria in the list of sponsors of the draft resolution.
14. Mr. Mogini (Italy) introduced draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.12/Rev.1 on behalf of its sponsors, which
had been joined by the following countries: Albania,
Australia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Eritrea, Ghana,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Norway, Senegal, Suriname, Thailand and
Turkey.
15. The Chairperson announced that the following
countries had also become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Barbados, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Côte
d’Ivoire, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Grenada, Guinea, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lebanon,
Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Namibia, Niger,
Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Saint Lucia,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Swaziland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia and
Zimbabwe.
16. Ms. Stefan (Liechtenstein) said that her country,
which had traditionally been a sponsor of the draft
resolution, had made proposals in the current year that
focused on the overall mandate of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to strengthen
domestic criminal justice systems in order to assist
States, particularly in post-conflict situations, to
investigate the most serious crimes, such as genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity, and to
prosecute the perpetrators. Liechtenstein regretted that,
despite its proposals to revert to the language of
previous resolutions, the draft resolution did notA/C.3/64/SR.43
5 09-61357
contain any explicit or implicit reference to that
important mandate. She hoped that the proposals would
receive broader support at the next session.
17. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.12/Rev.1 was adopted.
18. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that her country had joined the
consensus despite some reservations, particularly with
respect to the fourteenth preambular paragraph
referring to a common and shared responsibility to
combat transnational organized crime and terrorism, a
notion that was not enshrined in any existing regional
instrument or international convention on counter-
terrorism. She recalled that there was no internationally
agreed definition of terrorism, including State
terrorism. The fourteenth preambular paragraph was a
distorted interpretation of the third paragraph of the
Bangkok Declaration, which referred to the need to
improve international cooperation in combating crime
and terrorism at the multilateral, regional and bilateral
levels in a spirit of common and shared responsibility,
but did not in any way establish a common and shared
responsibility. If such a responsibility actually existed,
no State would openly protect or refuse to extradite
notorious terrorists such as the Cuban Luis Posada
Carriles, the perpetrator of numerous terrorist attacks,
including an attack against a Cuban aircraft travelling
from Venezuelan territory that had killed more than 70
people.
19. Her delegation also had reservations as to the
eleventh preambular paragraph referring to the links
between the illicit trafficking in firearms and
transnational organized crime and other forms of
crime, including terrorism: it did not recognize the
existence of systemic links between those offences,
each of which had different motives and should be
analysed on a case-by-case basis. Furthermore, the
establishment of an automatic or permanent link was a
denial of the presumption of innocence, a universally
recognized principle in the area of human rights.
20. Lastly, her delegation regretted the obstacles that
had prevented the holding of a transparent, open and
constructive discussion of the paragraphs on which it
had reservations. It intended to raise its concerns at the
sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly with a view
to achieving a more satisfactory text that reflected the
position of all Member States.
Agenda item 105: International drug control
(continued) (A/C.3/64/L.15/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.15/Rev.1: International
cooperation against the world drug problem
21. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that, in paragraph 7 (b) of the English version of the
text, a semicolon should be inserted instead of a
comma after the words “development programmes”.
With respect to the activities set out in paragraph 4, he
said that technical assistance for States that requested it
would be financed by extrabudgetary resources and
referred to section 16 of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011. With reference to
the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
he said that the recommendations in paragraph 21 of
the draft resolution would not entail any additional
expenditures. Therefore, draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.15/Rev.1 had no programme budget
implications. He recalled section VI of General
Assembly resolution 45/248 B, which referred to the
role of the Fifth Committee and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
22. He wished to underline the difference between a
special session of the General Assembly and a high-
level segment of the Economic and Social Council. A
special session would probably have programme
budget implications, because it would require practical
arrangements and procedural steps similar to those for
an ordinary session, such as the election of a president
and the preparation of a provisional agenda, whereas a
high-level segment would be easier to organize. He
was providing those details so that the Member States
could take a fully informed decision.
23. Mr. Sánchez (Mexico) said that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Algeria, Austria, Canada, Croatia, Cuba, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, France, Germany,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Norway, Poland,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Slovakia, Spain, Switzerland,
Turkey, Ukraine and United States of America. In his
view, the number of sponsors of the draft resolution
confirmed the determination of the international
community to combat the drug problem at the global
level through the adoption of an integrated andA/C.3/64/SR.43
09-61357 6
balanced strategy. The draft resolution had been
discussed at several sets of constructive informal
consultations that had made it possible to take into
account the concerns expressed about efforts to combat
the drug problem, which were a shared responsibility
and must be conducted through international
cooperation while also respecting the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and legal equality of States. He
welcomed the Secretary’s remarks regarding the
correction to paragraph 7 (b) and the recommendation
set out in paragraph 21, which he also believed had no
financial implications, and which would be considered
during deliberations at the sixty-fifth session of the
General Assembly.
24. The Chairperson announced that Albania,
Angola, Bahamas, Barbados, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
El Salvador, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guinea,
Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Malaysia, Malawi,
Morocco, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, San Marino, Suriname, Swaziland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, United Republic of Tanzania and
Zimbabwe had also become sponsors of the draft
resolution.
25. Mr. Mokin (Russian Federation) said that his
country did not wish to oppose the consensus on the
draft resolution, but had chosen not to become a
sponsor. The Russian Federation considered that the
omnibus resolution adopted by the United Nations on
the issue should be based on objective expert studies
indicating the main global trends and threats, as that
would determine the long-term effectiveness of
international cooperation in dealing with the world
drug problem. In particular, it was necessary to combat
the illegal cultivation of opium poppies and the
production and trafficking of narcotics from
Afghanistan. The point was not to underline the
particular problems of one country or pass judgment on
its efforts to combat narcotics, but to take into account
the role of opiates in the world drug market and the
links between drug trafficking and terrorist groups in
that country, and to recognize that narcotics from
Afghanistan posed a worldwide threat. The Russian
Federation was of the view that the scope of the
problem should not be underestimated in the draft
resolution and that there was no justification for
removing from paragraph 18 the call to strengthen
multifaceted international and regional cooperation,
particularly with respect to Afghanistan. His delegation
considered that, in the current year, Member States had
unfortunately moved away from the balanced approach
adopted in the omnibus resolutions of previous years,
which had taken fully into account the priorities of
international cooperation in combating the drug
problem, a move that would only hinder the efforts of
the international community.
26. Mr. Romero (Plurinational State of Bolivia) said
that he was gratified that the draft resolution, which
had achieved consensus among the Member States,
included a provision in paragraph 7 (c) to take account
of “the traditional licit uses of crops where there is
historical evidence of such use”. That was consistent
with the proposal by the Plurinational State of Bolivia
to amend article 49 of the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 1961 regarding coca leaf chewing, a
traditional practice whose long history was well
documented and which should therefore be preserved.
He hoped that all delegations would approve the
proposal, which would be a strict implementation of
the draft resolution. In any case, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia reiterated its full commitment to combating
the illicit trafficking in narcotics.
27. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.15/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted.
28. Mr. Bennwik (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Turkey; the stabilization and association process
countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Montenegro; and, in addition, the Republic of Moldova
and Ukraine, welcomed the Political Declaration and
the Action Plan adopted by the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, and congratulated the sponsors of the
draft resolution for their harmonization efforts. The
negotiations had indeed led to a longer and more
comprehensive text. However, the European Union
would have preferred the draft resolution to have a
greater focus on the issue of demand, as well as on the
prevention and treatment of HIV. It was for that reason
that some European Union member States had not been
able to join the sponsors of the draft resolution, which
had nonetheless given rise to some constructive
informal consultations.
29. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) expressed regret that her country had not
been able to become a sponsor of the draft resolution,A/C.3/64/SR.43
7 09-61357
due to reservations over paragraph 9. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela did not believe there was a
systemic link between different types of offences —
including terrorism — since each category of offence
had different motives. The establishment of such a link
ignored the rights of due process and the principle of
the presumption of innocence. Nevertheless, she
confirmed her delegation’s support for the draft
resolution and reiterated Venezuela’s commitment to
combating illegal drug trafficking.
Agenda item 62: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.18/Rev.1: Violence against
migrant women workers
30. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.
31. Ms. Banzon-Abalos (Philippines) announced that
Argentina, the Congo, the United Republic of Tanzania
and the United States of America had become sponsors
of the draft resolution. She wished to make the
following oral revisions: the English title should be
changed from “Violence against migrant women
workers” to “Violence against women migrant
workers”, a change that did not affect the French
version; in paragraph 5, the phrase “consistent with
their obligations under agreed international human
rights instruments” should be amended to read
“consistent with their human rights obligations and
commitments under human rights instruments”; and in
paragraph 17, the phrase “to direct the competent
authorities within their jurisdiction to inform her of her
rights in this regard and”, should be replaced by the
phrase: “to ensure that competent authorities respect
her freedom to communicate with and have access to
the consular officials of the country of her nationality,
and in this regard”, and the word “origin” should be
replaced by the word “nationality”.
32. The ambitious draft resolution, which she hoped
would be adopted by consensus, advocated respect for
the dignity of migrant women workers, including those
employed in the domestic or informal sectors.
Cooperation between the authorities of the country of
destination and the consular officials of the country of
origin was crucial to the protection of their rights, in
particular the right of access to health-care services
and to redress mechanisms in the event that their rights
were violated.
33. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Angola, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Cape Verde,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Ghana, Haiti,
India, Jamaica, Kenya, Mali, Mexico, Mozambique,
Papua New Guinea, Rwanda and Uruguay had become
sponsors of the draft resolution.
34. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.18/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
35. Mr. Vinluan (Singapore) said that Singapore
reaffirmed its commitment to protect the rights of
women migrant workers and had joined the consensus
on the draft resolution, but noted that the provisions
must be implemented within the applicable legal and
regulatory framework in each country.
Agenda item 62: Advancement of women (continued)
(b) Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth
World Conference on Women and of the
twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.60)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.60: Follow-up to the
Fourth World Conference on Women and full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly
36. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
37. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.60 was adopted.
38. The Chairperson suggested that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 55/488, the
Committee should take note of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women on its forty-second and forty-third
sessions (A/64/38), the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report on the future operation of the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women (A/64/79-E/2009/74) and the
note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the activities of the United Nations Development Fund
for Women (A/64/164 and Add.1).
39. It was so decided.A/C.3/64/SR.43
09-61357 8
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)
(A/C.3/64/L.53)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.53: Inadmissibility of
certain practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
40. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) recalled
that the following countries had become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Belarus, Benin, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Tajikistan and Turkmenistan.
41. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation),
introducing draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.53 on behalf of
its sponsors, who now also included Bolivia, Eritrea
and South Africa, said that the sponsors had striven
from the start to ensure the text was balanced and
acceptable to all delegations by holding open
consultations and bilateral meetings, as a result of
which they had decided to revise the text as follows:
the words “as well as similar extremist ideological
movements” should be added at the end of the fifth
preambular paragraph; in paragraph 1, the beginning of
the paragraph should read “Reaffirms the relevant
provisions of the Durban Declaration and of the
outcome document of the Durban Review Conference,
in which States”; in the English version of paragraph 2,
the word “Welcomes” should be replaced by “Takes
note with appreciation of”; in paragraph 3, the words
“as outlined in her report to the General Assembly”
should be deleted; in paragraph 8, after the words “the
anti-Hitler coalition”, the word “or” should be replaced
by the word “and”, and the words “those practices are”
should be replaced by the words “failure by States to
effectively address such practices”, and each
occurrence of the words “are incompatible” should be
changed to “is incompatible”; in paragraph 11, the
words “the particular importance of education” should
be replaced by the words “the particular importance of
all forms of education, including human rights
education”; a new paragraph 12 bis should be added, to
read as follows: “Stresses the importance of other
measures and positive initiatives aiming at bringing
communities together and providing them with space
for genuine dialogue, such as round tables, working
groups and seminars, including training seminars for
State agents and media professionals, as well as
awareness-raising activities, especially those initiated
by civil society representatives which require
continued State support”; in paragraph 15, after the
words “hostility or violence”, the word “shall” should
be changed to “should”; in paragraph 19, the words
“within exiting resources” should be deleted (a revision
made after consulting with the Secretariat, which had
confirmed that the necessary resources had already
been allocated to the mission of the Special
Rapporteur); and in paragraph 21, the word “Urges”
should be replaced by the word “Encourages”.
42. His delegation stressed that it was the struggle
against Nazism and its racist theories that had united
Member States and led to the establishment of the
United Nations and that any attempt to rewrite history
ran counter to the letter and the spirit of the Charter.
43. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Seychelles and Uganda had joined
the sponsors of the draft resolution as orally revised.
44. Ms. Kolontai (Belarus) thanked the Russian
delegation for keeping open the Committee agenda
item concerning the inadmissibility of the resurgence
of Nazism, Fascism and violent nationalist and racist
ideologies. The Second World War, during which
Belarus had lost one third of its population, had been
the greatest tragedy of the twentieth century. To
remember the lessons of that war was a moral duty
both to those who had fallen and to future generations.
That was one of the main objectives of the draft
resolution, which her delegation called upon other
States Members to support.
45. The Chairperson said that a recorded vote had
been requested on the draft resolution, as orally
revised.
46. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) asked
which delegation had made that request.
47. The Chairperson said that it had been the United
States delegation.
48. Ms. Phipps (United States of America), speaking
in explanation of vote before the vote, said that her
country was also revolted by any attempt to glorify
Nazi ideology and unreservedly condemned any
manifestation of religious intolerance. However, the
text as presented did not differentiate between
statements which, while they could be offensive,A/C.3/64/SR.43
9 09-61357
should nonetheless enjoy protection under the right of
freedom of expression, and criminal acts that were
motivated by prejudice, which must always be
outlawed. In a free society, hateful ideas were doomed
to failure because they had no solid basis. The best way
to fight intolerance was not to forbid offensive
language, but to combine effective judicial protection
with Government action on behalf of minorities and
religious groups, and energetically defend freedom of
religion and expression. Not having been able to
amend the text of the draft resolution in order to bring
it into line with the basic constitutional principles of
the United States, her delegation would not be able to
vote in favour thereof.
49. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the
stabilization and association process countries Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro; and, in
addition, Georgia, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said that the
European Union believed that the struggle against
neo-Nazism was part of the struggle against all forms
of racism and racial discrimination that should bring all
countries together. It was for that reason, and in order
to forge a real and serious response to the scourge of
neo-Nazism, from which no continent was free, that the
European Union had taken an active part in the
informal consultations with the sponsors of the draft
resolution. The European Union was happy that
paragraph 8 of the draft resolution, as revised on the
basis of some of its proposals, now ascribed racist
practices to individuals and groups rather than to
States.
50. Nevertheless, the European Union regretted that
not all the proposals submitted by the various
delegations had been more thoroughly considered, and
that some of its most serious concerns regarding human
rights in relation to racial discrimination and racism
had not been taken into consideration. As had been the
case in previous years, the draft resolution addressed
human rights in a selective manner and risked diverting
attention from real problems: the new paragraphs that
had been included only further watered down the
substance of the text. The European Union regretted
that once again, the Judgement of the International
Military Tribunal (Nuremberg trial) had been only
loosely cited. While it was firmly convinced of the
need to combat all forms of racism, it believed that the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, articles 4 and 5,
should be strictly complied with and any violation of
human rights and fundamental freedoms must be
prevented. The draft resolution did not underline that
point.
51. The European Union considered it superfluous to
require the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance to report to the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council on the implementation
of the resolution: the regular reports that the Special
Rapporteur presented to those two bodies already
provided a comprehensive picture of the situation. For
all those reasons, the European Union would abstain
during the vote on the draft resolution.
52. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.53, as orally revised.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic ofA/C.3/64/SR.43
09-61357 10
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland.
53. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.53, as orally revised,
was adopted by 124 votes to 1, with 55 abstentions.
54. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland), while thanking the
Russian Federation for having taken into account
several proposals for amendments and, in particular,
some of those put forward by Switzerland, explained
that his delegation had had to abstain from the vote
because the draft resolution did not address all
contemporary forms of racism and should have been
integrated into the draft resolution on racism
(A/C.3/64/L.54).
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to
self-determination (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.57)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.57: Use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
55. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) recalled
that Benin, Comoros, Ecuador, El Salvador, Gambia,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, South Africa and
Swaziland had become sponsors of the draft resolution.
Referring to paragraphs 17, 19 and 20 of the draft
resolution, he cited paragraphs 7 and 8 of the report of
the Secretary-General concerning revised estimates
resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the
Human Rights Council at its tenth and eleventh
sessions (A/64/353) and indicated that the draft
resolution had no programme budget implications.
56. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.57 on behalf of the sponsors,
who had been joined by the Dominican Republic,
reaffirmed the importance of the draft resolution and
expressed concern at the link between mercenary
activities and terrorism. At the request of numerous
African delegations, paragraph 13 had been revised and
now exactly reflected the text of General Assembly
resolution 63/164, paragraph 13. Furthermore,
paragraph 14 should become paragraph 17 bis.
57. The Chairperson said that a recorded vote had
been requested.
58. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) asked which
delegation had made that request.
59. The Chairperson said that it had been the United
States delegation.
60. Mr. Bennwik (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Turkey; the stabilization and association process
countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition, the Republic
of Moldova and Ukraine, said that the European Union
could not vote in favour of the draft resolution. While
concerned by the danger posed by mercenary activities
that had been mentioned in the report of the working
group, particularly with respect to the length and
nature of armed conflicts, the European Union believed
that the matter did not fall within the competence of
either the Committee or the Human Rights Council,
and should not be considered from the point of view of
human rights violations or constraints on the exercise
of the right of peoples to self-determination. The
European Union was determined to pursue in other
bodies the dialogue on the formulation of a definition
of mercenary activities and on the link between
mercenary activities and terrorism, subjects which
were included in the remit of the Sixth Committee.
61. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.57, as orally revised.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, BoliviaA/C.3/64/SR.43
11 09-61357
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Fiji, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Switzerland, Timor-
Leste, Tonga.
62. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.57, as orally revised,
was adopted by 122 votes to 53, with 5 abstentions.
63. Ms. Sapag (Chile) thanked the delegation of
Cuba for having deleted paragraph 9, concerning new
forms of mercenary activity, thereby enabling her to
vote in favour of the draft resolution. In her view, such
forms of mercenary activity had not been defined in
any judicial instrument.
64. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that he
believed that the draft resolution should be interpreted
and applied in the light of the relevant resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and the Special
Committee on Decolonization, which took into account
the special situation of the Malvinas Islands. In that
regard, he cited the last preambular paragraph and
paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX),
and also recalled the content of paragraph 1 of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). He concluded by
affirming that the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia
Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the surrounded
maritime areas were illegally occupied by the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which
had expelled the local population in order to install its
own nationals there.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.28, L.29,
L.30/Rev.1, L.40, L.42/Rev.1 and L.47)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.28: Promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order
65. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) recalled
that Algeria, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Lebanon,
Pakistan, Paraguay and Uzbekistan had become
sponsors of the draft resolution.
66. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.
67. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of its sponsors, who had been
joined by Burkina Faso, the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Lesotho, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Solomon
Islands, Swaziland and Syrian Arab Republic.A/C.3/64/SR.43
09-61357 12
68. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Botswana, Comoros, Ghana,
Madagascar, Mali and Zambia had also become
sponsors of the draft resolution.
69. The Chairperson said that a recorded vote on the
draft resolution had been requested.
70. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) asked which
delegation had made that request.
71. The Chairperson said that it had been the United
States delegation.
72. Mr. Bennwik (Sweden), speaking in explanation
of vote before the vote on behalf of the European
Union; the candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey; the
stabilization and association process country
Montenegro; and, in addition, the Republic of Moldova
and Ukraine, said that the European Union believed
that several parts of the draft resolution did not fall
within the competence of the Committee and were
cited in a selective and random manner, completely out
of context. Furthermore, the draft resolution stressed
the international obligation to control the globalization
mechanism, but made no mention of State duties and
responsibilities in that regard. The European Union
would therefore vote against the draft resolution.
73. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.28.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Chile, Mexico, Peru.
74. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.28 was adopted by
121 votes to 54, with 5 abstentions.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.29: Strengthening
United Nations action in the field of human rights
through the promotion of international cooperation
and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality
and objectivity
75. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) recalled
that Cambodia, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ecuador, Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, Pakistan, Russian
Federation, Rwanda and Turkmenistan had become
sponsors of the draft resolution.
76. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.A/C.3/64/SR.43
13 09-61357
77. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.29 on behalf of its sponsors,
who had been joined by Botswana, Burkina Faso,
Dominican Republic, Lesotho, Mali, Namibia,
Seychelles and Sierra Leone. She hoped that the draft
resolution would once more be adopted by consensus.
78. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Botswana, Cameroon, Colombia,
Comoros, Ghana, Solomon Islands, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia had
also become sponsors of the draft resolution.
79. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.29 was adopted.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.