United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.51
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
31 December 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-60808 (E)
*0760808*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 51st meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 21 November 2007, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 62: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 68: Elimination of racism and racial discrimination (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.51
07-60808 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/62/L.51)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.51: Situation of human
rights in Belarus
1. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that
Albania and Monaco had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution. Belarus had consistently ignored calls
from the Third Committee, the former Commission on
Human Rights and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to change course and
grant its citizens their basic rights. On the contrary, it
had mounted a vigorous campaign of denial of its
abysmal and deteriorating human rights record.
3. Belarus continued to use imprisonment as a
political strategy for dealing with opposition figures
and movements. Observation of elections by
independent international observers was not permitted,
and local observation was also severely restricted. The
people of Belarus were deprived of the right of
assembly, and political parties had been deregistered
on the slightest pretexts. The authorities had broken
into the private homes of those suspected of harbouring
opposition political views, confiscating computers and
printed material and jailing suspects. Trials were held
behind closed doors and young people were pressured
to testify against their peers.
4. In addition, the people of Belarus had little access
to alternative or independent sources of information.
Newspapers and leaflets about demonstrations were
regularly confiscated, and State-run printing companies
strongly discouraged from printing independent
newspapers. Independent websites were consistently
blocked and activity in Internet cafes closely
monitored. Finally, civil society in Belarus continued
to struggle against harsh and repressive restrictions
designed to deny them a voice in the administration
and future of their own country.
5. The Government of Belarus should be called to
account. Contrary to certain claims, the resolution was
an honest and truthful account of the unfortunate facts
on the ground in Belarus.
6. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Liechtenstein and Norway had joined the sponsors
of the draft resolution.
7. Mr. Shigabutdinov (Uzbekistan) expressed his
delegation’s regret at the continuing practice of
bringing country-specific resolutions before the
Committee. Such resolutions did not advance the cause
of human rights, but, on the contrary, put undue
political pressure on specific Member States and thus
complicated the situation. Human rights were best
advanced through constructive dialogue and mutual
respect between Member States within the Human
Rights Council. Efforts to exploit the human rights
situation in specific countries for political purposes
were counterproductive.
8. Ms. Rodríguez de Ortiz (Venezuela) said that
the Human Rights Council, under resolution 5/1, had
discontinued the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Belarus, sending a
clear message to the international community that it
would henceforth take action only on the basis of
objectivity, non-selectiveness and transparency.
Belarus, a signatory of the major human rights
instruments, was cooperating in good faith with United
Nations organizations. A number of countries were
attempting, however, to use the Third Committee to
undermine the work of the Human Rights Council and
to resort to the malpractices of the former Commission
on Human Rights. The Third Committee should free
itself of past practices and not resort to country-
specific resolutions, as they only served to create
mistrust.
9. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
country-specific resolutions were a major factor in the
continuing atmosphere of politicization and
confrontation that had destroyed confidence in the
Commission on Human Rights. It had been hoped that
the Human Rights Council would be able to rid itself
of the negativity that had overshadowed the work of
the Commission with the adoption of the universal
periodic review mechanism. Unfortunately, those hopes
had come to nothing.
10. One of the decisions reached by the Council had
been to discontinue the confrontational and politicized
mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Belarus. The Council had thereby sentA/C.3/62/SR.51
3 07-60808
a clear signal that such discussions of the human rights
situation in that country were no longer acceptable.
Belarus was a party to all the basic human rights
instruments. It carried out its international obligations
by submitting reports to the human rights treaty bodies
and engaged in cooperation and dialogue with all
United Nations human rights bodies.
11. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that she
regretted the insistence of some States on introducing
country-specific resolutions of a political nature, which
could affect relations between countries. Dealing with
human rights issues in a selective manner was
tantamount to interfering in the internal affairs of
sovereign States and contrary to the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. All
human rights matters should be examined under
internationally recognized instruments and in the
appropriate forum, namely the Human Rights Council.
Her delegation would vote against the draft resolution.
12. Ms. Bhoroma (Zimbabwe) said that country-
specific resolutions did not advance the human rights
agenda and only massaged the egos of their sponsors.
No single country was without a blemish on human
rights issues, including the sponsors of such
resolutions, which were about settling political scores
and constituted a further example of hypocrisy and
double standards. Zimbabwe would support the motion
for the adjournment of the debate. It would not support
the draft resolution.
13. Mr. Durdyev (Turkmenistan) said that his
delegation had welcomed the establishment of the
Human Rights Council and the subsequent agreement
on the institution-building package, including the
universal periodic review mechanism. Such an
approach could create a constructive atmosphere for
the discussion of human rights issues. It was therefore
disappointing that the Committee continued to
duplicate the Council’s work. His delegation favoured
non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
States. Human rights would be best advanced through
dialogue. The politicization of human rights and the
inability or reluctance on the part of some delegations
to acknowledge progress made were unacceptable. His
delegation would therefore not support the draft
resolution.
14. Mr. Emadi (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
the situation in Belarus did not warrant such a draft
resolution, which pursued purely political purposes.
His delegation opposed country-specific resolutions,
which undermined the credibility of the United
Nations. Any effort to promote and protect human
rights should be within the framework of the Human
Rights Council.
15. Mr. Saeed (Sudan) said that the draft resolution
was overpoliticized, selective and arrogant, and
reflected the attitude of the main sponsor who was
acting like the policeman of the world. Dialogue and
cooperation were preferable to confrontation, and his
country was opposed, as a matter of principle, to
country-specific resolutions.
16. Ms. Jang (Democratic Republic of Korea) said
that the main sponsor had introduced the draft
resolution because of the strategic importance of
Belarus. Any approach to human rights issues should
be unbiased and not interfere with the internal affairs
of sovereign States. Her delegation would vote against
the draft resolution if a recorded vote was taken.
17. Ms. Nassau (Australia) said that all United
Nations bodies, including the Third Committee, should
address human rights issues. All texts should be
examined on their merits. The Committee would be
failing to live up to its responsibilities if it did not
discuss human rights violations wherever and
whenever they occurred.
18. Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) said that no procedural
motion stood in the way of the debate on the draft
resolution concerning Belarus. However, he wondered
whether that debate amounted to a fair consideration of
the human rights situation on its merits and whether
delegations had received a balanced and unprejudiced
assessment of the situation in his country.
19. There had been no real dialogue but merely an
exchange of statements in which speakers had been
more intent on putting forward their own views than
listening to others. Of all the Main Committees of the
General Assembly, the Third Committee had the most
divisive voting patterns. That kind of voting not only
caused divisions among States but undermined even
the strongest argument and moral concern.
20. The sponsors of the draft resolution did not have
any procedural excuse to explain the lack of an open
and constructive dialogue on the allegations contained
therein. If anything, the debate had reflected the
Committee’s inability to make a sound judgement on
the appropriate ways and means of dealing withA/C.3/62/SR.51
07-60808 4
delicate situations. Even with a tangible alternative,
such as the universal periodic review, many were lulled
into believing that a shortcut on human rights was
possible.
21. What really mattered was the approach that
Member States would adopt from now on. He
wondered if they would continue to exaggerate their
differences or display such rare qualities as humility
and tolerance.
22. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that,
as indicated in its general statement, his delegation
considered that draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.51
undermined the institution-building package adopted
by the Human Rights Council and was thus totally
inappropriate. His delegation therefore moved the
adjournment of the debate on the draft resolution, in
accordance with rule 116 of the rules of procedure.
23. The Chairman invited two speakers to support
the motion and two to oppose it before it was put to the
vote in accordance with rule 116 of the rules of
procedure.
24. Mr. Guo Jiakun (China) said that the Human
Rights Council had been established to save the
international community from political confrontation.
With the completion of the Council’s institution-
building procedure, the Third Committee, as the
General Assembly’s specialized human rights body,
should steer clear of double standards. His delegation
therefore supported the motion for the adjournment of
the debate.
25. Mr. Gala López (Cuba) said that his delegation
was opposed to subjectivity and double standards in
human rights matters, which should not be used to
advance political ends or to seek domination. In view
of the manipulation exemplified in draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.51, his delegation supported the motion.
26. Mr. Bucci (San Marino) said that, in his
delegation’s view, no-action motions deprived Member
States of the right to express their opinions on issues
they deemed important for the international community
and for the promotion and protection of human rights.
Every Member State should be entitled to submit
resolutions on any such issue and to receive an
international response. His delegation would therefore
vote against the motion.
27. Ms. Carvalho (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that, when delegations put
forward a draft resolution, especially concerning grave
human rights violations, the Committee ought to take
action. If other delegations had concerns about the
political motive behind a given resolution, the
appropriate response was to vote against it or to
abstain. The systematic and repeated call for motions
to adjourn debates sine die represented an attempt to
prevent the consideration of resolutions on procedural
grounds, denying Member States their sovereign right
to bring before the General Assembly any concern that
they deemed to merit its attention. Such action ran
contrary to the practices of the General Assembly and
the spirit of dialogue.
28. Accusations of selectivity and double standards,
together with the inaccurate assertion that Western
countries sought to avoid international scrutiny, were
regrettable. European Union member States had
opened themselves up to scrutiny, cooperating fully
with the human rights treaty bodies, the special
procedures and the universal periodic review
mechanism of the Human Rights Council.
29. The Committee had a mandate to look at human
rights situations and had adopted resolutions
expressing its concern about the worst such situations
for over 30 years. In many cases, international
condemnation had helped to increase the pressure on
countries that had since turned into strong
democracies. Thus action should be taken by the
Committee to address the international community’s
concerns and urge the Government of Belarus to
comply with decisions taken by the General Assembly
and other United Nations bodies. The European Union
strongly urged delegations to vote against the motion
to adjourn the debate, regardless of their voting
intentions on draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.51.
30. A recorded vote was taken on the motion for the
adjournment of the debate on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.51.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, China, Congo, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,A/C.3/62/SR.51
5 07-60808
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritius, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Brazil, Cape Verde, Colombia, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Moldova,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Solomon Islands, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago.
31. The motion for the adjournment of the debate on
draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.51 was rejected by 79 votes
to 65, with 31 abstentions.
32. Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) expressed his
delegation’s regret that the motion to adjourn the
debate on the draft resolution had been rejected,
although it understood the difficulty encountered by
many delegations in supporting it. At the same time,
contacts with many permanent representatives and
Third Committee experts had given his delegation a
clear picture of the true feelings of most States. There
was a general distaste for unfounded and politically
motivated resolutions, which were at best subjective
and, on occasion, amounted to coercion. Although
there was wide support for an honest and well-founded
appraisal of human rights situations, the consideration
of country-specific situations was the prerogative of
the Human Rights Council.
33. Ms. Carvalho (Portugal), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey;
the stabilization and association process countries
Albania and Montenegro; and, in addition, Norway,
said that draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.51 related to an
issue of particular concern to the international
community with regard to the human rights situation in
Belarus, where the right to freedom of expression,
association and assembly continued to be
systematically violated. The Government of Belarus
had systematically refused to cooperate with the
Human Rights Council and, previously, the
Commission on Human Rights. Human rights
defenders and political opponents were harassed and
intimidated and the criminal justice system was used to
silence them. Independent media, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), students’ organizations,
independent trade unions, religious organizations and
other bodies of civil society faced persecution. Both
the presidential elections of 2006 and the municipal
elections of 2007 had failed to meet international
criteria on fairness and freedom. Those who spoke out
against the regime risked losing their jobs and their
freedom. Cases of enforced disappearances and/or
summary executions had been reported and officials
implicated in human rights violations continued to
enjoy impunity.
34. The adoption of the draft resolution would be of
fundamental importance in persuading the Government
of Belarus to improve the human rights situation, end
the impunity of violators of human rights and start a
process of democratization.
35. Mr. Myint (Myanmar) said that the draft
resolution was yet another clear case of the
politicization of human rights by a powerful State inA/C.3/62/SR.51
07-60808 6
order to exert pressure on a developing country. Such a
politically motivated approach would not promote the
cause of human rights but, by creating an atmosphere
of mistrust and confrontation, diminish it. As a member
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, his
delegation adhered to the Movement’s principled
position on country-specific resolutions. It was
opposed to the selective targeting of individual
countries, which was contrary to the founding
principles of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Charter of the United Nations. His delegation would
therefore vote against the draft resolution.
36. Mr. Jeenbaev (Kyrgyzstan) said that, in view of
the sterling work by Belarus on the trafficking of
persons, especially children, his delegation would not
support the draft resolution.
37. Ms. Gendi (Egypt) reiterated her delegation’s
opposition to country-specific draft resolutions on
human rights situations on the grounds that they were
selective and politicized human rights issues. Moreover,
they applied differing criteria that were not conducive
to objectivity in dealing with the problems at hand,
without resort to threat or confrontation, in a context of
international cooperation and capacity-building. The
unilateral style in which such draft resolutions were
tabled, without any objective discussion by the General
Assembly, was also wholly at odds with the efforts to
intensify international cooperation on human rights in a
multilateral setting. Without exception, human rights in
all countries should be periodically reviewed by the
Human Rights Council.
38. The same countries that annually sponsored
country-specific draft resolutions also regularly voted
in the Human Rights Council against draft resolutions
on flagrant human rights violations in the occupied
Arab territories, thereby signalling the double
standards employed in judging respect for human
rights. Such action not only affirmed the politicization
of human rights issues but also betrayed disregard for
the specific cultural, religious and traditional features
that were the key components of life in any country.
Ways of dealing with human rights violations in an
identical manner, despite such differences, should be
explored. In the light of those considerations, Egypt
would be voting against the draft resolution on the
situation of human rights in Belarus.
39. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.51.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Against:
Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Gambia, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Philippines, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,A/C.3/62/SR.51
7 07-60808
Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia.
40. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.51 was adopted by 68
votes to 32, with 76 abstentions.
41. Mr. Onischenko (Ukraine) said that his delegation
had voted in favour of the draft resolution in the belief
that the principles of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights should apply to all countries. His
delegation favoured effective dialogue between the
international community and Belarus, Ukraine’s
neighbour and trading partner, on human rights and
other issues. It had voted against the no-action motion,
since such a device precluded the possibility of
considering the substantive issues involved.
42. Ms. Williams (Jamaica) said that, session after
session, the consideration of country-specific
resolutions gave rise to an acrimonious atmosphere in
the Committee. In view of the fact that no country
could boast of a perfect human rights record, her
delegation strongly supported the universal periodic
review mechanism within the newly established
Human Rights Council, whereby all Member States
would be subject to scrutiny. It also welcomed the
provision enabling the Council to hold special sessions
to examine situations requiring urgent attention. The
relationship between the Council and the Committee
had not yet been settled, although it would, she hoped,
be clarified as the Council fully assumed its role.
43. The continuing concern over the selective
targeting of some countries and the inconsistencies and
lack of respect for Member States had called into
question the Committee’s effectiveness as a forum for
constructive dialogue and engagement with the
promotion and protection of human rights. The policy
of “naming and shaming”, which sought to embarrass
sovereign countries, had led only to strong resistance
and counterproductive rebuttals, which defeated the
purpose of addressing even those situations that
deserved to be dealt with in a concerted manner by the
international community. Her delegation had therefore
consistently abstained on country-specific resolutions
and on no-action motions. Such votes should not be
interpreted as meaning that Jamaica condoned or was
indifferent to human rights violations, particularly by
national authorities. The international human rights
instruments continued to set the standards for the
promotion and protection of human rights and her
delegation urged all States to abide by their obligations
under international law.
44. Ms. Abdelhak (Algeria) said that her delegation
had voted against the draft resolution because it felt
that country-specific resolutions fostered a climate of
confrontation that was harmful to the cause of human
rights. In a bid not to repeat the mistakes of the
Commission on Human Rights, the Human Rights
Council had set up the universal periodic review
mechanism, which was the only appropriate way of
considering the human rights situation in any country.
A cooperative approach, based on real dialogue, would
promote the protection of human rights in countries
under consideration. Stigmatization was not the
answer.
45. Mr. Peralta (Paraguay) said that, although his
delegation had voted in favour of the draft resolution,
the issue of human rights was a very sensitive one and,
following the adoption of the institution-building
package of the Human Rights Council, especially the
universal periodic review mechanism, it would be more
appropriate for country-specific resolutions to be taken
up by the Council.
46. Ms. Viotti (Brazil) said that the universal
periodic review mechanism established by the Human
Rights Council could make an important contribution
to avoiding the excessive politicization and selectivity
that had sometimes prevailed in the Commission on
Human Rights. Brazil was willing to submit to a
transparent and constructive assessment under that
mechanism and strongly encouraged all other
countries, including Belarus, to do the same. Although
the Council had decided not to renew the special
procedure on the situation of human rights in Belarus,
her delegation encouraged the Government of that
country to engage in dialogue with the Council and all
the other United Nations human rights mechanisms.
47. Mr. Strigelsky (Belarus) said that his delegation
recognized neither the form nor the content of the
resolution that had been adopted. The accusations it
contained were unfounded and inaccurate. The
resolution had no legal, political or moral force.
Belarus conscientiously participated, and would
continue to participate, in the international human
rights mechanisms, including the special procedures.
48. The decision on the institution-building package
of the Human Rights Council gave his delegation hope
for the future conduct of the United Nations humanA/C.3/62/SR.51
07-60808 8
rights system, since it would ensure that human rights
issues would be decided on a balanced and equitable
basis. Belarus was prepared to participate openly and
sincerely in such a process. It also wished to engage in
dialogue on human rights with all countries without
exception. The basis for such dialogue lay in equal
partnership and mutual respect.
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.82)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.82: Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa
49. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution contained no programme budget
implications.
50. Mr. Jesus (Angola) said that consultations had
been held on revisions to the draft resolution on
assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
in Africa (A/C.3/62/L.82). The sponsors proposed the
addition of two additional preambular paragraphs,
which would read:
“Recognizing the particular vulnerability of
women and children among refugees and other
persons of concern, including exposure to
discrimination, sexual and physical abuse,
“Recognizing also that refugees, internally
displaced persons and, in particular, women and
children are at an increased risk of exposure to
HIV/AIDS, malaria and other infectious diseases,”
In paragraphs 4 and 7, the information contained in
paragraphs 4 and 6, respectively, of General Assembly
resolution 61/139 had been updated. The sponsors also
proposed deleting paragraph 10 and, in the following
paragraph, inserting “within its mandate” after the
words “High Commissioner”. In paragraph 18, the
words “notes with interest … other relevant actors”
should be replaced by the words “encourages the High
Commissioner to continue to take steps to better ensure
the civilian and humanitarian character of asylum, in
consultation with States and other relevant actors, and
takes note of the UNHCR operational guidelines in this
regard”.
51. Lastly, he expressed satisfaction that a number of
States that were not members of the African Union
wished to sponsor the draft resolution: Antigua and
Barbuda, Austria, Azerbaijan, Canada, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal,
Romania, Spain, Sweden, Timor-Leste and the United
States of America.
52. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Afghanistan, Albania, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, El Salvador,
Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland,
Lithuania, Malta, Moldova, Montenegro, Nicaragua,
Norway, Poland, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, and Turkey wished to join in sponsoring the
draft resolution, as orally revised.
53. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.82, as orally revised,
was adopted.
Agenda item 62: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social Development and of the
twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.10/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.10/Rev.1: Implementation
of the Outcome of the World Summit for Social
Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of
the General Assembly
54. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution contained no programme budget
implications.
55. Mr. Hayee (Pakistan), speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, requested that action on the
draft resolution should be deferred.
56. It was so decided.
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued) (A/C.3/62/L.4, L.5/Rev.1 and
L.7/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.7/Rev.1: Promoting youth
participation in social and economic development
57. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution contained no programme budget
implications.A/C.3/62/SR.51
9 07-60808
58. Mr. Woodroffe (United Kingdom), speaking on
behalf of the other main sponsor, Senegal, the other
sponsors listed and Australia, Canada, Chile, Slovenia
and Switzerland, said that the title of the draft
resolution should be “Policies and Programmes
Involving Youth: youth in the global economy —
promoting youth participation in social and economic
development”.
59. The recognition by Governments, on the occasion
of the tenth anniversary of the World Programme of
Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond, of the
need to strengthen efforts to deliver internationally
agreed commitments on youth was all the more
important in today’s changing social and economic
environment. While it was true that youth today were
better poised than ever before to participate in, and
benefit from, global development (A/62/61-E/2007/7,
para. 5), the challenges presented by rapid changes in
the global economy must be addressed if it were to be
fully inclusive to all young people. The two main
sponsors hoped that the adoption of the draft resolution
would go some way towards helping to achieve that.
60. The sponsors were also pleased that, by adopting
the draft resolution, the General Assembly would also
be adopting the Supplement to the World Programme
of Action for Youth, as agreed at the current year’s
session of the Commission on Social Development.
The document identified five new priority areas of
particular relevance to young people and the actions
that Governments should take in response. With its
inclusion as an annex to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.7/Rev.1, it was his understanding that
A/C.3/62/L.4 would be withdrawn. Lastly, he
expressed appreciation to all delegations that had
participated in negotiations and to the youth delegates.
The latter’s commitment to the broader work of the
General Assembly and the United Nations was clear.
He hoped that the draft resolution reflected the key role
they had to play in discussions.
61. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Belize, Brazil, Burundi, the Comoros,
Croatia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guyana, Iceland, Lebanon, Liberia,
Mauritania, Moldova, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Paraguay, the Philippines, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, Uruguay and Zambia
wished to join in sponsoring the draft resolution, as
orally corrected.
62. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.7/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted.
63. The Chairman said that, in view of the
comments made by the representative of the United
Kingdom, he took it that the Committee did not wish to
take action on the draft resolution contained in
A/C.3/62/L.4.
64. It was so decided.
65. Mr. González (Costa Rica) said that he wished to
take advantage of the discussion under agenda item
62 (b) to point out that his delegation had fully
intended to join the list of sponsors of draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.5/Rev.1 entitled “Implementation of the
World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons: realizing the Millennium Development Goals
for persons with disabilities” but had been unable to do
so owing to its absence from the room at the time of its
adoption.
Agenda item 68: Elimination of racism and racial
discrimination (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.61)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.61: Inadmissibility of
certain practices that contributed to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
66. The Chairman said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
67. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
the authors of the draft resolution were alarmed by the
recent spread of extremist groups, such as neo-Nazis
and skinheads, who targeted people based on the colour
of their skin or their religion, as well as immigrants
and minorities. Such groups drew inspiration from the
very ideology that the United Nations had been
established to combat. The continued glorification of
Nazi crimes and former members of the Waffen SS
organization was inadmissible and a matter of deep
concern, since it fuelled very contemporary and
dangerous forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance that must be
combated at both the national and international levels.
Appropriately, the draft was being considered on the
sixty-second anniversary of the first Nuremberg trial.A/C.3/62/SR.51
07-60808 10
68. In paragraph 3, the words “remove or transfer”
should be deleted, and “or” should be inserted before
“demolish”.
69. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Angola, Benin, Bolivia, Cape Verde, Namibia and
Nigeria had joined the list of sponsors.
70. Mr. Durdyev (Turkmenistan) said that the draft
resolution was most timely. Racism, xenophobia and
related intolerance were no longer merely the purview
of political fringes. Ideologies which mankind had paid
an unprecedented price to overcome were once again
being extolled, with huge financial support and new
recruits among young people. Racist and extremist
groups frequently invoked their right to freedom of
expression; however, there was no such thing as a
democratic right to insult different peoples and
religions, or incite hatred, discrimination, violence and
intolerance. In Turkmenistan, such crimes were strictly
prohibited by law and the various ethnic communities
lived in peace and harmony. The international
community had a legal and moral obligation to outlaw
racist and xenophobic activities. He thus fully
supported the draft resolution and urged other
delegations to vote in favour of it.
71. The Chairman said that a recorded vote had
been requested on draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.61, as
orally revised.
72. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) asked
who had requested the recorded vote.
73. The Chairman said that the recorded vote had
been requested by the representative of the United
States.
74. Ms. Lopes (Portugal), speaking on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the stabilization and
association process countries Albania, Montenegro and
Serbia; and, in addition, Georgia and Moldova and in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
European Union was strongly committed to the global
fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance. Neo-Nazism was a particularly
abhorrent manifestation of racism and xenophobia and
must be combated firmly by all. As noted by the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance in his latest report (A/62/306), neo-Nazism
persisted in many societies. The threat of neo-Nazism
must be tackled within comprehensive efforts to
eliminate all forms of racism and xenophobia through
effective measures at the international, national and
regional levels, including through the full
implementation of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. The
ideas that neo-Nazism sought to undermine were at the
core of what the United Nations stood for. Combating
neo-Nazism must, therefore, be a common and
consensual priority for all. It should not be used for
extraneous purposes, thereby diluting the significance
of such issues, but should unite States in their common
goal of eliminating racism from their respective
societies.
75. For those reasons, the European Union had
participated actively in informal consultations with a
view to finding ways to ensure that the draft resolution
provided a real and serious response to contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance. While the main sponsors had been
willing to negotiate and address some of the concerns
raised by the European Union and other delegations,
the grounds for the European Union’s past concern
about the initiative remained largely unchanged.
76. Instead of comprehensively addressing the human
rights concerns related to racism and racial
discrimination, the draft resolution continued to have a
selective and unsubstantiated focus, disregarding those
concerns and deflecting attention from them.
Additionally, as in previous years, the European Union
would have liked the inaccurate citations of the
Judgement of the Nuremberg Tribunal to have been
rectified. The European Union had therefore proposed
that the draft resolution should adopt a more
comprehensive, objective and legally appropriate
approach that could provide real added value to the
global fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
77. Another matter of concern related to the view
taken in the draft resolution for addressing such
practices. The European Union fully agreed on the
need to combat manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
However, to be effective, such efforts must be in line
with articles 4 and 5 of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
and could not undermine human rights and
fundamental freedoms as defined by internationalA/C.3/62/SR.51
11 07-60808
human rights law. That principle should be brought out
more clearly in the draft before the Committee.
78. For those reasons, the European Union would
abstain in the vote.
79. Mr. Hagen (United States of America) said that
no country abhorred and condemned the ideology of
hatred and Nazism more than his. Americans were
grateful to live in a country where racial and religious
tolerance was widely practised and all persons could
voice their opinions and practise their beliefs without
fear of Government retribution. However, the draft
resolution failed to distinguish between actions and
statements that, while offensive, might be protected by
freedom of expression and actions and statements that
incited violence and should therefore be prohibited.
80. Curtailing expression was not a viable means of
eliminating racism and related intolerance. On the
contrary, only through the free flow of ideas, unfettered
discussion and vigorous debate could deplorable
ideologies be challenged and the truth be discovered.
In the words of two famous jurists, the purpose of
freedom of expression was to help protect a
“marketplace of ideas”. Accordingly, Government
should not prohibit or punish any speech because of an
underlying confidence that in a free society hateful
ideas would fail on account of their own intrinsic lack
of merit.
81. Free and unhindered expression was a
cornerstone of democratic governance. Democracy
depended on a knowledgeable citizenry whose access
to uncensored ideas, opinions and information enabled
it to participate as fully as possible in public life. For
that reason, prohibitions should be restricted to forms
of expression that directly threatened the public good
by inciting imminent violence or other unlawful
activity. Accordingly, his delegation would vote against
the draft resolution.
82. At the request of the representative of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on
A/C.3/62/L.61, as orally revised.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
83. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.61 was adopted by
122 votes to 1, with 52 abstentions.
84. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) expressed appreciation
to the Russian Federation for the last-minute change it
had made to paragraph 3, as it had allowed hisA/C.3/62/SR.51
07-60808 12
delegation to continue to abstain in the vote on the
draft resolution as a whole.
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.62)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.62: Use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
85. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications of the draft resolution in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, said that in order to implement the activities
requested by paragraphs 15 and 18 of the draft
resolution, total additional requirements under
Section 23 of the proposed programme budget for the
2008-2009 biennium were estimated at $139,600 to
cover the costs of one two-day regional governmental
consultation per year. That sum would include travel
and daily subsistence allowance for the members of the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right of peoples to self-determination ($29,200);
travel of representatives from each country of the
region ($66,800); interpretation services ($9,300);
travel and daily subsistence allowance for
accompanying staff ($9,300); and conference services,
including facilities, secretariat services and other
miscellaneous expenses for the duration of the
consultation ($25,000). No provisions had been
included under Section 23 of the proposed programme
budget for 2008-2009 since the estimated additional
resources had yet to be requested, in light of the
continuing review by the Human Rights Council of its
subsidiary machinery. A consolidated statement of
requirements arising from the review and the potential
absorptive capacity from reduced requirements arising
from an amended programme of work under the
proposed programme budget would be reported
subsequently to the Assembly.
86. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) said that the draft
resolution took account of the analysis and
recommendations found in the latest report of the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right of peoples to self-determination (A/62/301).
By adopting the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would request, inter alia, that the Working Group
should continue to take into account, in the discharge
of its mandate, the fact that mercenary activities
continued to occur in many parts of the world and were
taking on new forms, manifestations and modalities,
and that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights should convene other
regional governmental consultations on traditional and
new forms of mercenary activities as a means of
violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right of peoples to self-determination.
87. He wished to propose the following oral revisions
to the text: the sixth preambular paragraph should be
deleted; in the tenth preambular paragraph, the word
“noting” should be inserted before “the fact that”; and
in paragraph 15, the phrase “in the Republic of
Panama” should be inserted after “for convening”.
88. Furthermore, Belarus, Costa Rica, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi,
Namibia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Sierra Leone,
Swaziland, Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Zambia had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
89. Lastly, he called on all Member States to vote in
favour of the draft resolution, as orally revised, so as to
deliver a strong message of support for efforts to
address the use, recruitment, financing and training of
mercenaries.
90. Ms. Mizarela (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the stabilization and
associated process countries Albania and Serbia; and,
in addition, Georgia and Moldova, said that she shared
many of the concerns expressed in the reports of the
Working Group. She also recognized the dangers and
the potentially deep negative impact that contemporary
forms of mercenarism had on the length and nature of
armed conflicts. However, she was not convinced that
the matter was best tackled from the perspective of
violations of human rights and the right of peoples to
self-determination, or that the Third Committee and
Human Rights Council were the proper forums to
address the issue. The elaboration of a definition of
mercenaries and the linkages between mercenary
activities and terrorism fell, moreover, within the
competence of the Sixth Committee. The European
Union would therefore vote against the draft
resolution, but continue to actively engage with States
on the issue.A/C.3/62/SR.51
13 07-60808
91. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.62.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Chile, Fiji, Liechtenstein, New Zealand,
Switzerland, Tunisia.
92. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.62 was adopted by
122 votes to 51, with 6 abstentions.
93. Ms. Melon (Argentina) said that her country
supported the right to self-determination of peoples
under colonial domination and alien occupation, in line
with resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2625 (XXV).
However, the draft resolution just adopted should be
interpreted and applied in accordance with the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee relating to the
question of the Malvinas Islands. She referred, in
particular, to General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX)
et seq., which recognized the existence of a dispute
between the Governments of Argentina and the United
Kingdom concerning sovereignty and requested them
to resume bilateral negotiations in order to find as soon
as possible a peaceful, just and definitive solution,
taking into account the interests of the peoples of the
Islands.
94. Mr. Llanos (Chile) said that the equation of the
activities of certain private security companies with the
activities of mercenaries in the tenth preambular
paragraph was unjustified, since there was no legal
instrument that clearly defined the new modalities of
mercenarism. His delegation had therefore abstained in
the vote.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/C.3/62/L.26/Rev.1 and L.27)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.26/Rev.1: Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
95. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution contained no programme budget
implication.
96. Ms. Wandel (Denmark) said that the absolute
prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment was a fundamental
principle of human rights, clearly enshrined in theA/C.3/62/SR.51
07-60808 14
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and reaffirmed
in all relevant international and regional human rights
instruments. The consensus text before the Committee
was the result of open-ended consultations with a large
number of sponsors and other delegations. She wished
to introduce a small oral revision to the tenth
preambular paragraph. After the word “Council”, the
words “and its relevant resolutions” should be inserted.
97. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Australia, Bangladesh, Burkina Faso,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Israel, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Morocco, Rwanda, Timor-Leste and the United States
of America had joined the sponsors.
98. Mr. Stigelsky (Belarus) said that since his
delegation’s concerns had been incorporated in the
revised text (A/C.3/62/L.26/Rev.1), Belarus would join
the sponsors of the draft resolution and withdraw its
proposed amendment, contained in document
A/C.3/62/L.27.
99. The draft resolution contained in document
A/C.3/62/L.26/Rev.1 was adopted, as further orally
revised.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.30/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.30/Rev.1: Strengthening the
role of the United Nations in enhancing the
effectiveness of the principle of periodic and genuine
elections and the promotion of democratization
100. The Chairman said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
101. Mr. Hill (United States of America) said that
Member States appreciated the vital role of the United
Nations in promoting democracy, particularly free and
fair elections, worldwide, as evidenced by the strong
show of support for the draft resolution. He urged the
Committee to adopt the text by consensus.
102. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the sponsors had been joined by
Andorra, Armenia, Bangladesh, Cameroon, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Finland, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, India,
Iraq, Japan, Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Malta, Sierra Leone, Switzerland and
Ukraine.
103. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) said that his
delegation recognized that the United Nations had
provided electoral assistance at the request of Member
States and agreed that the United Nations Trust Fund
for Electoral Assistance must be maintained. However,
the draft resolution needed to reflect more clearly that
elections were an internal affair of States and an
expression of sovereignty. In that regard, his delegation
was concerned by the reinsertion in the text of the fifth
preambular paragraph, which did not appear in the
original version and which referred to two Commission
on Human Rights resolutions that, in his delegation’s
view, did not take adequate account of the fact that a
single model of democracy did not exist and that
democracy did not belong to one country or region, and
failed to adequately reaffirm due respect for
sovereignty, self-determination and territorial integrity.
It was for that reason that the same paragraph had been
submitted to a vote two years earlier. His delegation
had hoped that the paragraph in question would not be
reinserted, so as to allow the draft resolution to be
adopted by consensus. In view of its reinsertion, he
was obliged to request a separate vote on the
paragraph.
104. At the request of the representative of Cuba, a
recorded vote was taken on the fifth preambular
paragraph of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.30/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malta,A/C.3/62/SR.51
15 07-60808
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Belarus, Bolivia, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Malaysia, Mali, Myanmar,
Namibia, Papua New Guinea, Singapore, South
Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
105. The fifth preambular paragraph of draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.30/Rev.1 was adopted by
142 votes to none, with 24 abstentions.*
106. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), speaking on a point of order,
said that rule 129 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly stipulated that, if parts of a proposal
were voted on separately, the parts of the proposal
which were approved should be put to the vote as a
whole.
107. Mr. Hill (United States of America) said that the
situation did not seem to be governed by rule 129,
since Cuba had not moved for division and the gavel
had already been struck.
108. Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) recalled a similar
situation four years previously (A/C.3/58/SR.34).
109. The Chairman suggested that action on the draft
resolution should be resumed at the following meeting
in order to spare the interpreters.
110. Mr. Saeed (Sudan) said that an interruption of
proceedings in the middle of taking action on a draft
resolution might set an unfortunate precedence.
111. After a procedural discussion in which
Mr. Attiya (Egypt), the Chairman and Mr. Saeed
(Sudan) took part, Mr. Khane (Secretary of the
Committee) confirmed that whenever a delegation
moved to divide a proposal, which included voting on a
particular paragraph, rule 129 was applied.
112. A recorded vote was taken on the draft resolution
as a whole.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
* The delegation of Trinidad and Tobago subsequently
informed the Committee that it had intended to vote in
favour of the fifth preambular paragraph.A/C.3/62/SR.51
07-60808 16
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Syrian Arab Republic, Zambia.
113. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.30/Rev.1 was adopted
by 173 votes to none, with 2 abstentions.*
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
* The delegation of Zambia subsequently informed the
Committee that it had intended to vote in favour of the
draft resolution.