United Nations A/C.3/63/SR.43
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-third session
Official Records
Distr.: General
22 January 2009
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
08-61094 (E)
*0861094*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 43rd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 20 November 2008, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Majoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)
Contents
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 97: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 62: Elimination of racism and racial discrimination (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 39: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 55: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly (continued)
Agenda item 56: Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 63: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)A/C.3/63/SR.43
08-61094 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/C.3/63/L.45)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.23,
A/C.3/63/L.25/Rev.1, A/C.3/63/L.28,
A/C.3/63/L.29, A/C.3/63/L.36, A/C.3/63/L.43,
A/C.3/63/L.45 and A/C.3/63/L.46)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.23: National institutions
for the promotion and protection of human rights
1. The Chairman said that he had been advised that
draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.23 had no programme
budget implications.
2. Mr. Schroeer (Germany) said that the following
delegations had joined the sponsors: Albania, Andorra,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Estonia,
Georgia, Ghana, Iceland, Israel, Lithuania, Malta,
Morocco, Poland, Portugal, Russian Federation, Sierra
Leone, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). He wished to
make some revisions to the text. In the second line of
operative paragraph 10 the words “in the international
human rights system, especially” should be deleted. In
the third and fourth lines of operative paragraph 12 the
words “as well as with the World Bank, other” should
be deleted. In the second line of operative paragraph 24
the words “within their respective mandates” should be
inserted following “to work”; the words “in close
cooperation” should be deleted, and the words
“Member States and” should be inserted following
“with”. In the fifth line the word “joint” should be
replaced by “the”; in the sixth line the words “and the
United Nations Development Programme” should be
deleted. He hoped the text as orally revised would be
adopted by consensus.
3. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following delegations wished to
join the sponsors: Bangladesh, Benin, Central African
Republic, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Honduras,
Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Montenegro, Nigeria, Panama,
Peru, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Serbia, Ukraine and United Republic of
Tanzania.
4. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.23, as orally revised,
was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.25/Rev.1: Effective
promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons
Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and
Linguistic Minorities
5. The Chairman said that he had been advised that
draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.25/Rev.1 had no
programme budget implications.
6. Ms. Nguyen (Austria) said that a number of
delegations had joined the sponsors: Albania, Australia,
Belarus, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Georgia, Greece, Italy,
Latvia, Malta, Montenegro, Poland, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste and
Ukraine. She said that in the third line of the first
preambular paragraph the words “taking into
consideration” should be replaced by “bearing in
mind”. The draft resolution enjoyed widespread
support and she hoped that, as in previous years, it
would be adopted without a vote.
7. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the delegations of Cyprus, Mauritius
and Nicaragua wished to join the sponsors.
8. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.25/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
9. Ms. Phipps (United States of America) said that
her delegation had joined the consensus in recognition
of the importance of protecting the rights of minorities.
Her delegation nevertheless regretted that the Human
Rights Council had not lived up to expectations and
had failed to prevent political alliances aimed at not
telling the truth about human rights violations. She
underscored that it was the understanding of her
delegation that operative paragraph 5 applied solely to
States that chose to engage in follow-up to the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination and
Related Intolerance. Her Government had objections to
the Durban outcome and the current review process
and did not participate in such activities. It was
nevertheless proud of its efforts to protect the rights of
minorities within its borders and of its work at theA/C.3/63/SR.43
3 08-61094
international level to promote the rights of minorities
on a global scale.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.28: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
10. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the sponsors had been joined by Afghanistan,
Botswana, Congo, El Salvador, Honduras, Kuwait,
Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Qatar, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Tunisia, Uzbekistan and Zambia.
11. The Chairman said that he had been advised that
draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.28 had no programme
budget implications. A recorded vote had been
requested.
12. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) introduced draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.28 on behalf of the sponsors, which had
been joined by Azerbaijan, Myanmar, the Philippines
and Viet Nam, and said that the large number of
sponsors reflected the growing interest in studying the
impact of globalization, including changes in
technology, production methods and means of
communication in the context of the food, fuel and
financial crises. The aim of the draft resolution was to
promote greater understanding of those challenges and
to show ways of averting the negative aspects of
globalization. He hoped that the draft resolution would
be adopted by consensus and that it would then be
implemented by all Member States.
13. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the sponsors had been joined by Bolivia and the
Gambia.
14. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), speaking on a point of order,
asked which delegation had requested a recorded vote
on draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.28.
15. The Chairman said that a recorded vote had
been requested by the delegation of France on behalf of
the European Union.
16. Mr. Gonnet (France), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting on behalf of the European
Union; the candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey; the
stabilization and association process countries Albania
and Montenegro; and, in addition, Liechtenstein and
the Republic of Moldova, said that the European Union
attached great importance to globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights.
However, it could not support the draft resolution
because it focused exclusively on the negative impact
of globalization. The European Union acknowledged
that the benefits of globalization were uneven but
believed nonetheless that globalization could increase
prosperity throughout the world and have a positive
impact on the enjoyment of human rights. In addition,
it seemed necessary to examine the effects of
globalization on particular human rights on a case-by-
case basis without making generalizations. The
European Union had voted against a similar draft
resolution at the sixty-second session and had hoped
that it would have been possible for delegations to
discuss the text of A/C.3/63/L.28 in informal
consultations.
17. At the request of the representative of France, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.28.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, TrinidadA/C.3/63/SR.43
08-61094 4
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Brazil, Chile, Singapore.
18. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.28 was adopted by
125 votes to 53, with 3 abstentions.
19. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that his delegation had
hoped that the draft resolution could have been adopted
by consensus, particularly since the sponsors had held
two rounds of informal consultations.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.29: Subregional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
20. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, said that the
additional provisions made in the programme budget
for the biennium 2008-2009 in response to the request
contained in resolution 62/221 had provided an
additional amount of $520,100 for two elements:
$381,100 under post resources for the establishment of
two new posts, one P-3 and one local level and the
conversion of three local level and one national officer
posts; and non-post resources of $139,000 to be
accommodated within the resources approved under
section 23, Human rights, of the programme budget for
the biennium 2008-2009. The total resources approved
for the subregional centre for Human Rights and
Democracy in Central Africa under section 23, for the
biennium 2008-2009 amounted to nine posts and
$584,500 in post resources. In addition, the Centre was
supported by extrabudgetary resources of
approximately $365,000, as well as two associate
experts.
21. There would be no requirement for an additional
appropriation in the biennium 2008-2009 if the
Committee were to adopt draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.29. With regard to paragraph 5, note should
be taken of section VI of General Assembly resolution
45/248 B, in which the Assembly reaffirmed that the
Fifth Committee was the appropriate Main Committee
of the Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for
administrative and budgetary matters, and reaffirmed
the role of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions.
22. The sponsors had been joined by Albania,
Algeria, Austria, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chile,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Djibouti, Egypt,
El Salvador, France, Ghana, Guinea, Honduras, Kenya,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Mali,
Morocco, Portugal, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, Swaziland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Uganda and Zambia.
23. Mr. Makanga (Gabon), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.29, said that, given the
international support for the Subregional Centre, his
delegation hoped that the draft resolution would be
adopted by consensus.
24. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the sponsors had been joined by Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, the Comoros, Ethiopia, Italy,
Malawi, Namibia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Spain, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the United States of
America.
25. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.29 was adopted.
26. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) said that his
delegation expressed its full support for the draft
resolution. It was of the view that the provisions of the
resolution applied to the regional area involved in the
activities undertaken by the Centre.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.36: Missing persons
27. The Chairman said that he had been advised that
draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.36 had no programme
budget implications.A/C.3/63/SR.43
5 08-61094
28. Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan) noted that Lebanon
had erroneously been named as a sponsor. He said that
in the first line of the third preambular paragraph the
word “Welcoming” should be replaced by
“Acknowledging”. Given the importance of raising
international awareness of the issue of missing persons,
he hoped that the draft resolution would be adopted
without a vote.
29. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following delegations wished to
join the sponsors: Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Colombia, Congo, Hungary, Guatemala,
Latvia, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Lithuania,
Netherlands, Pakistan, Republic of Moldova, Timor-
Leste and United States of America.
30. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.36, as orally revised,
was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.43: Respect for the right to
universal freedom of travel and the vital importance of
family reunification
31. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that Nicaragua
had joined the sponsors. Given the importance of
family reunification and the free flow of financial
remittances for migrants, she called on all delegations
to join the sponsors and vote in favour of draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.43.
32. The Chairman said that the representative of the
United States of America had requested a recorded
vote.
33. Ms. Phipps (United States of America), speaking
in explanation of vote before the voting, said that her
delegation would vote against the draft resolution. The
text, in referring to the universally recognized freedom
to travel, confused the right of an individual to leave
any country and to enter his home country with the
sovereign right of a State to determine who could enter
its territory. Furthermore, while her Government
encouraged family reunification, there was no right to
family reunification under international law, as implied
by the text, nor was any such right recognized in
practice or immigration legislation by any State.
34. Her Government considered migration that
occurred in a humane, legal and orderly manner to be a
positive phenomenon. Approximately 20 per cent of
migrants worldwide resided in the United States; in
2007 it had welcomed more than one million
permanent legal migrants, of whom approximately two
thirds had entered the United States for the purpose of
family reunification. Her Government believed that the
family was the basic unit of society and encouraged
family reunification through its generous immigration
policies.
35. While her Government sought to facilitate the
flow and reduce the transfer costs of remittances, she
underscored there was no right per se to transfer
remittances, as implied by the draft resolution. Her
Government recognized the importance of such
remittances for the families of migrants. States
nevertheless had the right to determine the scope of
their economic relations with other States and both
citizens and residents were expected to comply with
any legal restrictions relating to international financial
transactions.
36. At the request of the representative of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.43.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.A/C.3/63/SR.43
08-61094 6
Against:
Israel, Palau, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
37. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.43 was adopted by
118 votes to 3, with 60 abstentions.
38. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico) stressed the importance of
family reunification and the free flow of remittances
for migrant workers and their families, as basic rights
that should be enjoyed by all migrants without
interference. Although the fourth and fifth preambular
paragraphs and operative paragraph two of the draft
resolution referred to documented migrants and
operative paragraph four referred to legal migrants, it
was the position of his delegation that those rights
should be enjoyed by all migrants, whatever their legal
status, including undocumented migrants.
39. Ms. Banzon-Abalos (Philippines) expressed
support for the rights of migrants to freedom of travel
and family reunification. Those issues were especially
relevant in a world where such factors as globalization,
poverty, conflict and environmental change caused
movements of people and challenged the unity of the
family. They deserved greater attention from
Governments and the international community and she
urged delegations to avoid politicizing those issues,
which affected the very fabric of communities and the
well-being of their people.
40. A comprehensive approach must be adopted,
which should include measures to increase sensitivity
to the needs and rights of migrants and their families.
Speaking specifically with regard to the fourth and
fifth preambular paragraphs and operative paragraphs
two and four, she stressed that it was the position of
her delegation that the right to family reunification and
to the free flow of remittances should apply to all
migrants, whether documented or not.
Draft resolution C/C.3/63/L.45: Equitable geographical
distribution in the membership of the human rights
treaty bodies
41. The Chairman said that draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.45 had no programme budget implications.
A recorded vote had been requested.
42. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Bangladesh, Rwanda and Saudi
Arabia had joined the sponsors. Equitable geographical
distribution in the membership of the human rights
bodies would ensure their objectivity. He hoped that
the draft resolution would be adopted by consensus.
43. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following countries also wished to
join the sponsors: Bolivia, Chad, Dominican Republic,
Ghana, Honduras, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Indonesia,
Solomon Islands, Namibia, Togo and Zambia.
44. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
human rights treaty bodies recognized the importance
of giving consideration in their membership to
equitable geographical distribution. However, failure to
respect that principle in practice affected the quality of
the recommendations made following review of the
periodic reports of States parties and the general
comments on the individual normative provisions of
treaties. The situation was alarming but not hopeless;
his delegation urged States parties to take the necessary
action to find a solution to the problem.
45. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking on a point
of order, asked which delegation had requested a
recorded vote on A/C.3/63/L.45.
46. The Chairman said that the delegation of the
United States of America had requested a recorded
vote.
47. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) said that he believed
that all delegations were committed to ensuring
equitable geographical distribution in the membership
of the human rights treaty bodies and therefore hoped
all delegations would be able to support the draft
resolution.A/C.3/63/SR.43
7 08-61094
48. Mr. McMahan (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that the draft resolution aimed to establish new
standards for the recruitment of members by the human
rights treaty bodies. However, those treaty bodies
already had established membership procedures and
already recruited members from diverse backgrounds.
It was not appropriate for the General Assembly to
attempt to substitute its judgement for that of States
parties, which were responsible for establishing
membership procedures, and it was essential to ensure
that treaty bodies remained independent and objective.
He therefore urged all delegations to vote against the
draft resolution.
49. Mr. Gonnet (France), speaking on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey;
the stabilization and association process countries
Albania and Montenegro; and, in addition,
Liechtenstein and the Republic of Moldova, said that
the European Union fully recognized the importance of
giving consideration to equitable geographical
distribution in the membership of the main human
rights treaty bodies. However, it would vote against the
draft resolution because it believed that it was not the
role of the General Assembly to attempt to influence
the membership procedures of treaty bodies; it was for
the States parties to decide on membership procedures.
50. The European Union rejected the proposed quota
system set out in paragraph 3, as well as the proposal
made in paragraph 5 that the chairpersons of the human
rights treaty bodies should submit recommendations to
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights on how to achieve better geographical
representation in their respective treaty body. The
European Union regretted that the delegation of Cuba
had not been able to suggest ways of achieving better
geographical distribution without suggesting a system
of quotas. It was also regrettable that informal
consultations had not been held to discuss ways of
reaching an agreement on the draft resolution.
51. At the request of the representative of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.45.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Brazil, Cape Verde, Timor-Leste, Ukraine.A/C.3/63/SR.43
08-61094 8
52. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.45 was adopted by
122 votes to 53, with 4 abstentions.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.46: Committee on the
rights of the child
53. Ms. Hill (New Zealand), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.46, said that Andorra, Chile,
Colombia, France, Qatar and Uruguay had joined the
sponsors. The Committee on the Rights of the Child
had to consider more reports from States parties than
any other human rights body. There was now a
substantial backlog, such that reports were often
considered three or four years after submission. There
was broad support for exceptional measures to be taken
to address the issue, as in previous years. Consultations
would continue on a revised text, which she hoped
would gain consensus.
54. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Panama, Republic of
Korea, Senegal and United Republic of Tanzania had
joined the list of sponsors.
Agenda item 97: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.9/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.9/Rev.1: Improving the
coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons
55. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee),
speaking in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly with regard to the
programme budget implications of operative
paragraphs 11 and 13 of draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.9/Rev.1, said that implementation of the
activities in paragraph 11 would be funded from
extrabudgetary resources. In that regard he recalled
that the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, in the report on the
consolidated budget for the biennium 2008-2009 for
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(E/CN.7/2007/17-E/CN.15/2007/18), had indicated that
extrabudgetary resources had been projected to be
$294,804,200.
56. As for operative paragraph 13, he recalled that by
its resolution 62/237, the General Assembly had
approved regular budget resources totalling
$36,819,000 under section 16, International drug
control, crime prevention and criminal justice, of the
programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009.
57. Accordingly, adoption of draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.9/Rev.1 would not entail any additional
appropriation for the biennium 2008-2009.
58. Mr. Metelitsa (Belarus) wished to orally revise
the text. In the first line of operative paragraph 5, the
words “to continue their efforts” should be inserted
following “Governments”. He welcomed the flexibility
shown by delegations during consultations despite
differences of opinion on the advisability of a global
plan of action on preventing trafficking in persons and
looked forward to the submission by the Secretary-
General of a background paper on coordination of
efforts against trafficking in persons. He urged the
Committee to adopt the draft resolution by consensus.
59. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following delegations wished to
join the sponsors: Bahamas, El Salvador, Jamaica,
Lebanon, Mauritius (on behalf of the Group of African
States), Mexico, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Thailand and
United Arab Emirates.
60. Mr. Dhalladoo (Mauritius), speaking on behalf
of the Group of African States, said that the resolution
was one of the most important at the current session.
Trafficking in persons was a challenge to stability and
prosperity, hindered the reconciliation of political
interests with humanitarian and human rights
obligations, and threatened international peace and
security. Many victims were African.
61. The Group was grateful to the sponsors and other
Member States for agreeing to consultations on a
United Nations action plan, as proposed by the African
Union in July 2008. Such an action plan would allow a
coordinated approach, making use of the available
legal mechanisms and involving all stakeholders,
including United Nations agencies and civil society.
The Group understood that the consultations would be
held under the auspices of the President of the General
Assembly.
62. Mr. Gonnet (France), speaking on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey; the
stabilization and association countries Albania,
Montenegro; and, in addition, the Republic of Moldova
and Ukraine, said that the European Union remained
firmly committed to combating trafficking in persons,
and strongly supported the United Nations Convention
on Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,A/C.3/63/SR.43
9 08-61094
Especially Women and Children. The States parties had
undertaken a range of other relevant national and
regional initiatives.
63. Although the European Union would join the
consensus on the draft resolution, it was not completely
convinced that a global action plan against trafficking
in persons would add value to existing strategies. Such
a plan could divert attention from current efforts and
from the instruments already in place. The European
Union had, however, agreed to study the issue in
greater detail.
64. The resolution called on the Secretary-General to
collect the views of all stakeholders. Those
stakeholders should include the bodies based in
Vienna, such as the Inter-Agency Cooperation Group
against Trafficking in Persons, the Convention on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, and the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention on Transnational Organized Crime. Their
input would allow an in-depth discussion, whether
through a global action plan or other approaches.
65. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.9/Rev.1 was adopted.
66. Ms. Halpern (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of vote after the voting, said
that the United States remained committed to
combating trafficking in persons. The Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons
deserved much credit for what had been achieved thus
far. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.9/Rev.1 welcomed the
progress made at the fourth session of the Conference
of the Parties to the Convention. Her country
encouraged all Member States to join in that work,
which was not limited to States parties.
67. It was important to strengthen the Inter-Agency
Cooperation Group and support relevant regional
action plans, such as those of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Economic
Community of West African States. Any discussion of a
global action plan should be deferred until the issuance
of the Secretary-General’s report on the question,
which should include input from all concerned
stakeholders, including the working group on
trafficking established by the Conference of States
Parties to the Convention. Her Government regretted
that the Conference was not mentioned in the
resolution: its mandate to promote implementation of
the Protocol had a basis in article 32 of the
Convention. Moreover, a global plan of action could
divert valuable resources from the tasks at hand.
68. The Chairman suggested that the Committee
should take note, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 55/488, of the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance in implementing the universal
conventions and protocols related to terrorism
(A/63/89) and the report of the Secretary-General on
improving the coordination of efforts against
trafficking in persons (A/63/90).
69. It was so decided.
Agenda item 62: Elimination of racism and racial
discrimination (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)
(A/C.3/63/L.53/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.53/Rev.1: International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination
70. Ms. Rondeux (Belgium), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.53/Rev.1 and speaking also on
behalf of Slovenia, said that Andorra, Azerbaijan,
Bulgaria and Thailand had joined the sponsors. By
adopting a resolution on the question biennially, the
General Assembly reaffirmed the importance of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination. In its present form,
the draft resolution was intended to grant the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
an additional week of meeting time per session from
August 2009 until 2011. That Committee received a
growing number of reports, but had only six weeks in
which to consider them. As a compromise between the
wishes of various delegations, the General Assembly
would, at its sixty-fifth session, reassess the
Committee’s meeting time. She hoped that the
resolution would be adopted by consensus.
71. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had also become sponsors:
Bangladesh, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Congo,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Ireland,
Kazakhstan, Netherlands, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Republic of Korea, Serbia, Spain, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and United Republic
of Tanzania.A/C.3/63/SR.43
08-61094 10
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.51/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.51/Rev.1: Global efforts for
the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
72. Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda), introducing
draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.51/Rev.1 on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, said that it was largely an
updated version of General Assembly resolution
62/220. The changes were aimed at endorsing the
decisions of the first and second substantive sessions of
the Preparatory Committee for the Durban Review
Conference. The draft resolution focused on the
decision to hold the Review Conference and on the
modalities for its organization. It reaffirmed that there
would be no renegotiation of the agreements contained
in the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
and recommended that intersessional meetings of the
Human Rights Council focusing on follow-up to the
World Conference and implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action should not be
scheduled so as to overlap with relevant General
Assembly meetings.
73. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Kazakhstan had become a sponsor.
Agenda item 39: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.55)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.55: New international order
74. The Chairman said that draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.55 had no programme budget implications.
75. Ms. Al-Zibdeh (Jordan) said that she hoped the
draft resolution would be adopted by consensus.
76. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Afghanistan, Lebanon and Pakistan had joined the
sponsors.
77. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.55 was adopted.
Agenda item 55: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social Development and of the
twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.5/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.5/Rev.1: Implementation of
the outcome of the World Summit for Social
Development and the twenty-fourth special session of
the General Assembly
78. Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda), introducing
draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.5/Rev.1, made a number of
oral revisions to the text. The order of the fourth and
fifth preambular paragraphs should be reversed. In the
seventh preambular paragraph, the phrase “is an
important instrument to achieve” should be replaced by
“has an important role to play, as reaffirmed in the
International Labour Organization Declaration on
Social Justice for a Fair Globalization, in achieving”.
In the tenth preambular paragraph, the word “may”
should be replaced by “can”, and “crisis” should be
replaced by “crises”. In operative paragraph 17, the
word “people” should be replaced by “peoples”. In
paragraph 25, the word “national” should be deleted. In
paragraph 41, the word “unfair” should be replaced by
“some”, and the word “particularly” inserted between
“on employment growth” and “in developing
countries”. In paragraph 44, the word “contributions”
should be replaced by “contribution”, and
“(UNITAID)” inserted after “International Drug
Purchase Facility”. In paragraph 49, the phrase
“provide an assessment of” should be replaced by
“address, inter alia,”. The words “fuel and” should be
deleted, and the phrase “global development goals”
replaced by “social development goals”.
79. The following Member States had joined the list
of sponsors: Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belarus,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. She
hoped that the draft resolution would be adopted by
consensus.
80. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following Member States had also become
sponsors: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Iceland, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Norway, Republic of Moldova, SanA/C.3/63/SR.43
11 08-61094
Marino, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and Ukraine.
81. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.5/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
82. Ms. Halpern (United States of America) said
that, although her country had joined the consensus, it
had concerns about the use of such resolutions to
redefine the development language negotiated in
Monterey; they undermined the commitment made by
sponsors to increase their official development
assistance. The implication in paragraph 43 that there
was an agreed target for such assistance was a case in
point. The United States had more than doubled its
official development assistance since the Monterey
conference in the belief that such assistance could be
effective in leveraging critical changes in health and
education, governance and free market reform.
However, assistance could be misapplied and was
dwarfed by other financing sources, including private
investment flow, remittances and private philanthropy,
which must be taken into account.
Agenda item 56: Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/63/L.14/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.14/Rev.1: Future operation
of the International Research and Training Institute for
the Advancement of Women
83. The Chairman said that draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.14/Rev.1 had no programme budget
implications.
84. Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda), introducing
draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.14/Rev.1, said that Belarus,
Israel, Italy and Spain had joined the sponsors. She
hoped that, following the extensive consultations on
the text, it would be adopted by consensus.
85. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Austria and Mexico wished to join the
sponsors of the draft resolution.
86. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.14/Rev.1 was
adopted.
Agenda item 63: Right of peoples to self-determination
(continued) (A/C.3/63/L.52)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.52: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
87. The Chairman said that draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.52 had no programme budget implications.
A recorded vote had been requested.
88. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.52, said that the following countries had
joined the sponsors: Bulgaria, Cape Verde, Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Ecuador, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti, Jamaica, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Montenegro,
Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, San Marino, Slovenia,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste and Togo. The draft resolution
reaffirmed the Palestinian people’s inalienable right to
self-determination. He hoped that it would be adopted
by consensus, thereby sending to the Palestinian people
a strong message of solidarity and encouragement. It
would contribute to the long-overdue realization of
their aspiration to have their own viable, independent,
sovereign State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
89. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Central African Republic, Estonia
and Ukraine wished to join the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
90. Mr. Gonnet (France), speaking on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey;
the stabilization and association process countries
Albania, Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition,
Liechtenstein, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine,
said that the European Union remained committed to
the Palestinian people’s inalienable right to self-
determination. That right must be exercised with a
view to achieving the goal set in the Quartet’s road
map, approved by the two parties, of a viable,
independent, democratic, fully sovereign Palestinian
State, enjoying territorial continuity, living in peace
and security side by side with Israel and its other
neighbours. That offered the best guarantee for the
security of the State of Israel and its acceptance as a
partner within the region. The European Union
therefore welcomed the results of the conference held
in Annapolis in November 2007 and hoped that the
dialogue resumed on that occasion would continue and
lead swiftly to an agreement accepted by all. The
negotiation process should be accompanied by closer
cooperation on the ground and the strengthening of
Palestinian institutions. The European Union called on
the parties to honour their commitments, particularly in
respect of movement and access between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority.
91. Ms. Halpern (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that the United States had worked continuously toA/C.3/63/SR.43
08-61094 12
support the social and economic development and
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people, as
demonstrated by its high level of assistance to them,
and remained committed to the two-State solution. Her
delegation could not support the draft resolution,
however, as it reflected an outdated approach dating
from a time when the Palestinian people believed that
the solution to their problems lay solely with the
United Nations. The United Nations must support both
parties and be perceived by both as an honest broker
between them. One-sided resolutions harmed the
Organization’s credibility and performed no useful
role.
92. At the request of the representative of Israel, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.52.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Canada, Equatorial Guinea,
Fiji.
93. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.52 was adopted by
175 votes to 5, with 5 abstentions.
94. Ms. Halperin (Israel) said that her delegation
fully supported the Palestinian people’s aspirations to
self-determination, but only in the context of the two-
State solution. As the President of Israel had informed
the General Assembly the previous week, that solution
was closer than ever before, particularly in view of the
Saudi Arabian proposal, which had developed into the
Arab peace initiative. Two weeks earlier, at a meeting
of the Quartet held in Sharm el-Sheikh, the Israeli
Foreign Minister had reaffirmed Israel’s recognition of
Palestinian aspirations and had again stressed the need
to recognize Israel’s interests, including its right to live
in peace and security, which continued to be imperilled
by rocket attacks by Hamas, denounced by the
President of the Palestinian Authority himself. The
resolution adopted was one-sided, particularly since it
failed to take into account the security of Israel or the
incremental steps set out in the road map. The former
Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, had questioned the
approach of the United Nations to the peace process,
and Member States should consider whether such
resolutions brought any relief or benefit to
Palestinians. It was clear that they did not and that
progress could only be made through bilateral
negotiations, as at the Sharm el-Sheikh and AnnapolisA/C.3/63/SR.43
13 08-61094
meetings. It was distressing that the Committee should
choose to disregard such developments and had not
done more to encourage genuine consultations between
Israel and the Palestinian people. Her delegation had
therefore called for a recorded vote and had voted
against the resolution.
95. Mr. Zvachula (Micronesia, Federated States of)
said that his delegation had voted against the
resolution. Micronesia was committed to the two-State
solution and could not accept some of the preambular
paragraphs of the resolution, which prejudged the
outcome of ongoing negotiations. Moreover, paragraph
2 endangered the impartiality of the United Nations
and would not advance the Palestinian people’s right to
self-determination.
96. Mr. Bowman (Canada) said that his delegation
had abstained from voting on the resolution as it did
not address both parties’ responsibilities for reaching a
solution. Canada maintained its strong support for the
Palestinian people’s right to self-determination as part
of the negotiated, two-State settlement laid out in the
road map. He commended the bilateral negotiations
begun in Annapolis and encouraged the parties to
continue that process.
97. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that, while
there was no denying the Palestinian people’s right to
build an independent and viable State, the exercise of
the right to self-determination required the existence of
an active subject in the form of a people under alien
subjugation, domination and exploitation, as
established in paragraph 1 of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV). If there was no such subject,
there was no right to self-determination. That right
should also be interpreted in accordance with the
purposes and principles set out in the Charter of the
United Nations, resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2625
(XXV), and other relevant United Nations resolutions.
98. On the question of the Malvinas Islands, the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Special Committee on Decolonization referred to the
particular situation arising from that question. In
particular, General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX),
inter alia, and all the decisions of the Special
Committee on Decolonization, recognized the
existence of a dispute between the Argentine Republic
and the United Kingdom as the sole parties concerning
sovereignty, establishing that the way to resolve it was
through the resumption of bilateral negotiations in
order to find a just, peaceful and definitive solution,
taking into account the interests of the population of
the Islands; the right to self-determination was not,
therefore, applicable to that question.
99. Ms. Nadya Rasheed (Observer for Palestine)
said that it was crucial to reaffirm the Palestinian
people’s right to self-determination, which was being
denied. Israel’s vote against the resolution showed that
it was opposed to the two-State solution, which
required mutual recognition by the two parties. That
was a prerequisite for negotiations. Israel’s continued
colonization of the occupied territories, including East
Jerusalem, threatened the Palestinian people’s right to
self-determination, as did all the crimes and atrocities
perpetrated against the Palestinians by the occupying
Power. Moreover, the strong vote in favour of the
resolution showed the failure of Israel’s attempts to
misrepresent the facts on the ground.
100. She was perplexed by the dichotomous position
of the United States, which, while expressing support
for the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, denied the Palestinians’ right to statehood and to
self-determination. She called on the United States
delegation to reconsider its vote. The Palestinian
people had been dreaming of statehood for more than
40 years and would never succumb to oppression.
101. Ms. Hibell (United Kingdom), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply in accordance with rule
115 of the rules of procedure, said that the United
Kingdom’s position on the Falkland Islands was well
known: it had no doubt regarding its sovereignty over
the Falkland Islands. That position was based on the
principle of self-determination, as set out in article 1,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations and
article 1 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. There could be no negotiations with
respect to the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands
unless, and until, the inhabitants wanted negotiations to
take place. The islanders had made it clear on several
occasions that they did not want any change in the
status of the islands.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.