United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.49
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
14 December 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-60481 (E)
*0760481*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 49th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 20 November 2007, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 66: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 68: Elimination of racism and racial discrimination (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/62/SR.49
07-60481 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.82)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.82: Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa
1. Mr. Jesus (Angola), speaking on behalf of the
Group of African States, requested that action on the
draft resolution should be deferred to allow delegations
more time to consider the revised text.
2. It was so decided.
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/62/L.20/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.20/Rev.1: Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women
3. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the programme-budget implications would not be
available until the following day. He suggested that the
Committee should therefore defer action on the draft
resolution.
4. It was so decided.
Agenda item 66: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.24/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.24/Rev.1: Rights of the child
5. Ms. Carvalho (Portugal) requested that action on
the draft resolution should be deferred, as negotiations
were still under way.
6. It was so decided.
Agenda item 68: Elimination of racism and racial
discrimination (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.65 and L.66)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.65: From rhetoric to
reality: a global call for concrete action against racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of
and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action
7. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the draft resolution would give rise to programme-
budget implications that would not be available until
the following day. He suggested that action on the draft
resolution should therefore be deferred.
8. It was so decided.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.66: Report of the Human
Rights Council on the preparations for the Durban
Review Conference
9. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee),
outlining the programme-budget implications, recalled
that in the document entitled “Revised estimates
resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the
Human Rights Council at its resumed second session,
its third session and its third special session in 2006”
(A/61/530/Add.1), the Secretary-General had informed
the Assembly that the requirements that would arise to
support the preparatory process for the Review
Conference would be absorbed in the provisions for the
2006-2007 biennium, while the estimated requirements
for the following biennium would be considered in the
context of that biennium’s proposed programme
budget. The Secretary-General would, in accordance
with established practice, revert on the financial
implications, if any, of the Review Conference, when
the modalities of the Conference had been finalized.
10. Mr. Jesus (Angola), speaking on behalf of the
Group of African States, urged Member States to
approve the draft resolution by consensus.
11. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Cuba, Dominica, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Lebanon and Norway had joined the sponsors.
12. Mr. Hagen (United States of America) requested
a recorded vote on the draft resolution, which called
for an inappropriate use of limited United Nations
resources. Particularly objectionable was the
suggestion in the report of the Preparatory Committee
(A/62/375) that the Secretary-General should find
resources for funding numerous duplicative and costly
preparatory meetings, including at the regional level,A/C.3/62/SR.49
3 07-60481
with the implication that such funding should come
from the regular budget. The United States had
objections to the overall direction and procedures
leading up to the Review Conference. The process by
which the draft resolution had been brought before the
Committee was also troubling. There had been no open
discussions on its contents or on the 44-page report
that it categorically endorsed.
13. Ms. Eilon Shahar (Israel), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that Israel,
as a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, was committed to
ensuring the equality of each individual without
prejudice to their race, gender, ethnicity or religion.
However, the Durban Conference of 2001 had been
anything but a meeting to eliminate racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Some delegations and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) had manipulated the occasion to demonstrate
their deep-seated prejudice and hatred for one Member
State and one particular people, failing to show it the
same respect, tolerance, fairness and equal treatment
they demanded for themselves. Along with the United
States, Israel had thus been compelled to withdraw
from the Conference. Her delegation would continue to
vote against resolutions that ignored the fact that the
Conference had been a fiasco and that heralded it as a
worthy display of international resolve to combat
hatred and promote tolerance. Her delegation would
vote against the draft resolution, in the hope that the
mistakes of Durban would be rectified with time and
that an honest consensus could be reached in which
support for the elimination of racism and intolerance
was wholehearted and without exception.
14. At the request of the representative of the United
States, a recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.66.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, The former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia, Cambodia, Canada, Fiji.
15. The draft resolution was adopted by 169 votes to
2, with 4 abstentions.
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.63)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.63: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
16. The Chairman said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.A/C.3/62/SR.49
07-60481 4
17. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that the large number of
sponsors reflected the importance the international
community attached to helping the Palestinian people
to break free from occupation and realize their
inalienable and long-overdue right to self-
determination. He hoped that the draft resolution
would translate into a larger United Nations
engagement in the Middle East peace process, in the
context of the Quartet and confidence-building efforts,
with a view to attaining a genuinely negotiated
settlement towards a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace. An unequivocal show of solidarity at a time of
need would be a first step towards liberating all
peoples from each and every form of foreign control.
Adoption of the draft resolution would also contribute
to the establishment by the Palestinian people of an
independent, sovereign and viable State on their own
land, alongside Israel, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.
18. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) noted
that Andorra, Bolivia, Dominica, Ethiopia, Moldova,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Timor-Leste had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
19. Ms. Eilon Shahar (Israel), requesting a recorded
vote, said that her delegation recognized the right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, but
expected the Palestinians in turn to respect Israel’s
right to peace and security. Israel accepted the two-
State vision and had been actively promoting it for
some time, as evidenced by a number of international
agreements to which it was a party. The inability of the
Palestinian people to achieve statehood was thus not
due to any lack of will on Israel’s part, but to the
Palestinians’ failure to recognize that Israeli security
was in their own interests, as well as being a
prerequisite for Palestinian statehood. The road map
and other international agreements were unequivocal in
determining that both Israel and Palestine had rights as
well as responsibilities.
20. However, draft resolutions such as the one before
the Committee only affirmed Palestinian rights without
demanding fulfilment of their responsibilities, which
included denouncing terrorism and ending the
violence. The world could not afford another failed
State and Israel would not tolerate a State that allowed
terrorism on its border. Stagnation and inaction were
not in Israel’s interest, which was why her Government
continued to meet with the Palestinian leadership.
Currently, it was preparing for a dialogue in Annapolis,
which would enable the culmination of the two-State
vision. Israel would vote against the draft resolution.
21. Mr. Hagen (United States of America), speaking
in explanation of vote before the voting, said the
United States had worked continuously to support the
socio-economic development and legitimate political
aspirations of the Palestinian people. Its assistance to
Palestinians compared favourably with its aid to other
parts of the world and it was committed to a two-State
solution. His delegation could not, however, support
the draft resolution since it reflected an outdated
approach conceived when the Palestinian people
believed that the solution to their problems lay in the
United Nations. There was indeed a role for the
Organization, but that lay in supporting the two parties
to work with each other, within the context of the
Quartet. One-sided resolutions did nothing to resolve
the issue; they only undermined the credibility of the
United Nations, which must be perceived by both sides
as an honest broker in the conflict.
22. Ms. Nassau (Australia) said that, although her
delegation supported a peaceful negotiated settlement
based on a two-State solution, it would abstain in the
voting, since the text contained unbalanced language
that would do nothing to help resolve the conflict.
23. At the request of the representative of Israel, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.63.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,A/C.3/62/SR.49
5 07-60481
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, The former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Canada, Equatorial Guinea,
Fiji.
24. The draft resolution was adopted by 172 votes
to 5, with 5 abstentions.
25. Ms. Melon (Argentina) said that, without
prejudice to her country’s recognition of the
Palestinian people’s right to build an independent and
viable State, the exercise of the right to self-
determination required the existence of an active
subject in the form of a people under alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation, as established in
paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV). Therefore, if there was no such subject, there
was no right to self-determination. That right should
also be interpreted in accordance with the purposes and
principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2625 (XXV), and other
relevant United Nations resolutions.
26. As for the question of the Malvinas Islands, the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Special Committee on Decolonization referred to the
particular situation arising from that question. In
particular, General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX)
et seq. and all the decisions of the Special Committee
on Decolonization recognized the existence of a
dispute between the Argentine Republic and the United
Kingdom as the sole parties concerning sovereignty,
establishing that the way to resolve it was through the
resumption of bilateral negotiations in order to find a
just, peaceful and definitive solution, taking into
account the interests of the population of the Islands;
the right to self-determination was not, therefore,
applicable to that question.
27. Ms. Tavares (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Turkey; the stabilization and associated process
countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition, Iceland and
Moldova, reiterated the European Union’s firm
commitment to enabling the Palestinian people to fulfil
their right to self-determination. That would include
the possibility of establishing a sovereign State in the
framework of a two-State solution, as set forth in the
Quartet’s road map and agreed upon by both parties,
resulting in a viable, contiguous, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State existing side by side in
peace with Israel living within recognized and secure
borders. Such a solution constituted the best possible
guarantee for the security of Israel and its acceptance
as an integrated partner in the region.
28. The European Union, for its part, stood ready to
contribute within the Quartet to preparations for the
upcoming meeting in Annapolis and would continue to
support the parties in their ongoing negotiations and in
the subsequent implementation period. Progress in
negotiations should go hand in hand with enhanced
cooperation on the ground and the strengthening of
Palestinian institutions, which would help improve the
daily life of the Palestinian people. The European
Union urged the parties to take additional steps
towards meeting previous commitments, including
under the road map and the Agreement on Movement
and Access.A/C.3/62/SR.49
07-60481 6
29. Mr. Bowman (Canada) reiterated his delegation’s
strongest possible support for the Palestinian people
and their right to self-determination as part of the
negotiated, two-State settlement laid out in the road
map, endorsed by the Security Council, which Canada
fully supported. He acknowledged ongoing efforts
towards establishing a peaceful settlement and
welcomed the current bilateral dialogue. However,
since the resolution did not adequately address the
responsibilities of both parties to the conflict, Canada
could not fully support it and had chosen to abstain.
30. Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Observer for Palestine)
said that the outcome of the vote reaffirmed the
international community’s unwavering support for the
Palestinian people and for their right to self-
determination, the fulfilment of which was essential to
the enjoyment of all other basic human rights.
31. Expressing regret that it had not been possible to
adopt the draft resolution by consensus, she said it was
a matter of deep concern that Israel continued to vote
against a resolution that simply reaffirmed basic
principles of international law and called for the
exercise, by the Palestinian people, of the right to self-
determination. Voting against that right was
contradictory to Israel’s professed position in favour of
a real peace settlement based on the existence of two
States, and mutual recognition of that right was a
prerequisite for achieving a just and lasting peace.
Moreover, Palestinians as well as Israelis had a right to
live in peace and security. To truly recognize a people’s
right to self-determination was to recognize that their
continued subjugation under occupation was neither
legal nor tenable. That should be obvious to all States
that supported peace, even those that had voted against
the draft resolution or abstained. It should also be
obvious to Israel that its ongoing occupation did not
ensure its security, but simply perpetuated instability
and insecurity for both peoples and throughout the
region.
32. The achievement of peace in the Middle East
depended on a solution that guaranteed the basic and
national rights of both peoples. Recognition of the
Palestinian people’s right to self-determination was the
first step in that direction. For decades, the Palestinian
people had struggled for that right to be realized.
International support during those years had been
instrumental in sustaining their resilience and their
hope that one day there would be an independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Her
delegation’s ultimate hope was that it would not need
to consider such a draft resolution the following year.
If it did, she hoped that the draft would at least be
adopted unanimously.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.35 and L.42)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.35: Combating defamation
of religions
33. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution contained no programme-budget
implications.
34. Mr. Hayee (Pakistan), speaking on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), read out
a number of oral revisions to the draft resolution. In the
sixth preambular paragraph, the words “follow-up to”
should be replaced by “implementation of”; in the
seventh preambular paragraph, “, beliefs” should be
inserted after “religions”; in the eighth preambular
paragraph, the words “against human beings” should
be deleted and the words “an affront to human dignity”
replaced by “a violation of human rights”; in the ninth
preambular paragraph, the phrase “different cultures
and religions” should be replaced by “people belonging
to different cultures, religions and beliefs”; in the tenth
preambular paragraph, the words “and beliefs” should
be inserted after “religions” and the phrase “the
common values shared by all humankind” replaced by
“common values”; in the eleventh preambular
paragraph, the words “their national and” should be
inserted before “international efforts” and the phrase
“cultures and religions” replaced by “cultures,
religions and beliefs”; in the twelfth preambular
paragraph, the words “cultural and religious” should be
deleted; the entire thirteenth preambular paragraph
should be replaced by the sixteenth preambular
paragraph, minus the words “and noting that the
increased intellectual and media discourse is among the
factors exacerbating such discrimination”; in the
fourteenth preambular paragraph, the phrase “in
addition to the negative projection of Islam in the
media and the introduction and enforcement of laws
that specifically discriminate against and target
Muslims, particularly against Muslim minoritiesA/C.3/62/SR.49
7 07-60481
following the events of 11 September 2001,” should be
inserted after “in many parts of the world”; and in the
fifteenth preambular paragraph, the phrase “is among
the causes of” should be replaced by “could lead to”
and the words “leads to” deleted.
35. Regarding the operative part, he said that, in
paragraph 2, the words “some regions of” should be
deleted; in paragraph 4, the word “also” should be
deleted and the phrase “and incitement to religious
hatred” inserted after “defamation of religions”; in
paragraph 5, the word “further” should be replaced by
“also”; in paragraph 7, the phrase “and incitement to
religious hatred” should be inserted after “defamation
of religions” and the words “members of” before
“target groups”; in paragraph 9, the phrase “and
incitement to religious hatred, against” should be
inserted before “Islam and Muslims in particular”; in
paragraph 10, the phrase “the right to freedom of
expression, which should be exercised with
responsibility” should be replaced by “the right to hold
opinion without interference, and the freedom of
expression, and that the exercise of these rights carries
with it special duties and responsibilities” and the word
“are” inserted twice, once before “provided by law”
and once before “necessary”; in paragraph 11, the word
“resolute” should be deleted and the phrase
“dissemination of racist and xenophobic ideas and
material aimed at any religion or its followers”
replaced by “advocacy of national, racial or religious
hatred”; in paragraph 12, the phrase “respect for all
religions and their value systems” should be replaced
by “respect for all religions and beliefs and the
understanding of their value systems”; in paragraph 13,
the phrase “respect different religions and beliefs”
should be replaced by “respect people regardless of
their different religions and beliefs”; in paragraph 14,
the phrase “and incitement to religious hatred” should
be inserted after “defamation of religions”; in
paragraph 16, the word “initiate” should be replaced by
“promote”, the phrase “religious diversity” should be
replaced by “religious diversity and belief” and the
phrase “support and promote” replaced by “support and
participate in”; and, in paragraph 17, the words
“members of” should be inserted before “any
community”.
36. Lastly, he announced that the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela wished to join the list of sponsors.
37. Mr. Hagen (United States of America) requested
a recorded vote on draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.35, as
orally revised.
38. Mr. Malhotra (India), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that his delegation firmly
opposed the defamation or negative stereotyping of any
religion, but had a number of concerns with the draft
resolution, in particular its excessive focus on one
religion. Most countries had communities belonging to
many religions. The international community should be
concerned about the defamation and negative
stereotyping of any of them. His delegation would
therefore abstain in the vote.
39. Mr. Hagen (United States of America) said that
his country had been founded on the principle of
freedom of religion. A country must not only
recognize, but also protect, its citizens’ right to choose
a religion, change religion and worship freely.
Consequently, countries must not discriminate against
individuals who chose a particular religion or chose to
practise no religion at all. Neither, however, must they
close their eyes to attacks against individuals because
of their religion. Countries must have a legal
framework in place so as to allow individuals the
freedom of worship without fear of persecution.
40. His delegation agreed with many of the general
tenets in the draft resolution but felt that it was
incomplete insofar as it emphasized one religion in
particular. More inclusive language would have better
furthered the objective of promoting religious freedom.
41. Ms. Tavares (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the
stabilization and association process countries
Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition, Georgia and
Moldova, said that the European Union firmly believed
in tolerance, non-discrimination and freedom of
expression, thought, religion or belief and was
convinced that dialogue could help overcome gaps in
perceptions, concepts and ideas. It also attached great
importance to combating all forms of discrimination
based on religion or belief and incitement to religious
hatred. The General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council should continue to address those issues,
including through dialogue with the relevant special
procedures. It was important to raise the alarm about
the serious instances of intolerance, discrimination and
acts of violence based on religion or belief,A/C.3/62/SR.49
07-60481 8
intimidation and coercion motivated by extremism that
were occurring throughout the world. A comprehensive
and balanced approach was needed to combat
intolerance. Religious intolerance was a global
problem and not limited to certain regions or certain
religions or beliefs. Followers of all religions and
beliefs, as well as non-believers, could be victims of
human-rights violations. Any list of victims could only
be exclusive.
42. Several resolutions discussed directly in the
plenary Assembly related to culture, peace and
religions. Third Committee resolutions should be
clearly focused on human rights and based on specific
human-rights concepts and have a rights-based
approach to issues at hand. The concerns set out in the
draft resolution amounted to religious intolerance, the
fight against which had always been a core element of
the Organization’s human-rights agenda and had been
addressed specifically by the General Assembly for
over 30 years. For the European Union, “defamation of
religions” was not a valid concept in a human-rights
discourse. From a human-rights perspective, members
of religious or belief communities should not be
viewed as parts of homogenous entities. International
human-rights law protected primarily individuals in the
exercise of their freedom of religion or belief, rather
than the religions as such. Moreover, in most legal
systems, “defamation” was a legal concept that entitled
individuals or entities with legal personality to redress
against slander or libel. Given that religions or beliefs
did not enjoy legal personality in most States, it was
difficult to see how the concept of “defamation of
religions” could be used to promote human rights or to
provide protection from or redress against human-
rights violations.
43. The European Union had repeatedly expressed its
concerns regarding the general approach, conceptual
framework and terminology of the draft resolution,
stressing that discrimination based on religion or belief
must be addressed in all its aspects and was not
confined to any one religion or belief or any one part
of the world; that the protection of the rights of persons
belonging to religious minorities was central to
freedom of religion or belief; that all human rights
must be respected and protected at an equal level; and
that promoting respect for adherence to all religions or
beliefs was best addressed in a comprehensive manner.
The Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or
belief herself had indicated that the use of the concept
of defamation of religion could be counterproductive,
as the main focus should remain the rights and
freedoms of individuals.
44. The European Union had repeatedly indicated its
willingness to engage in dialogue and to work towards
a balanced text and terminology acceptable to all
stakeholders. In that regard, it had presented a series of
proposals aimed at changing the text’s focus from
“Combating defamation of religions” to “Combating
incitement to religious hatred”, a more widely accepted
concept in the field of human rights. For the text to be
acceptable to the European Union, all references to
“defamation of religions” would have to be suppressed.
While some of the European Union’s amendments had
been accepted, they had not changed significantly the
general approach, conceptual framework or
terminology of the draft resolution. The European
Union would therefore vote against the draft
resolution.
45. Mr. Llanos (Chile) agreed that freedom of
religion must be respected in a general and unrestricted
manner, without discrimination against individuals or
religions. However, freedom of expression, too, must
be respected and guaranteed by the State. Both
freedoms were fundamental human rights and could be
limited only by those exceptions laid down in the law,
provided such exceptions were in accordance with
international legal instruments. His delegation agreed
with the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or
belief (A/62/280, para. 77) that criminalizing
defamation of religions might create an atmosphere of
intolerance and increase the chances of a backlash, and
that accusations of defamation of religions might stifle
legitimate criticism. His delegation stressed the
importance of strengthening dialogue between cultures
and religions in order to promote mutual knowledge
and understanding and supported efforts undertaken in
that regard, in particular through the Alliance of
Civilizations. In the light of the foregoing, his
delegation would abstain in the vote.
46. At the request of the representative of the United
States, a recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.35, as orally revised.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,A/C.3/62/SR.49
9 07-60481
Cameroon, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen.
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi,
Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Fiji,
Ghana, Guatemala, India, Japan, Kenya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico, Mongolia,
Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Solomon Islands, United Republic of
Tanzania.
47. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.35, as orally revised,
was adopted by 95 votes to 52, with 30 abstentions.*
48. Ms. Noorita (Singapore) said that her delegation
had voted in favour of the draft resolution on the
understanding that it applied to all religions. Singapore
was a multiracial, multireligious city State. The
religious, cultural and racial differences among its
people must not become sources of misunderstanding
and friction. Defamation of all kinds bred intolerance,
stereotypes and distrust, and undermined societal
harmony and cohesion.
49. Her delegation agreed that the exercise of the
right to freedom of expression must not be at the
expense of others. Such freedoms came with
responsibility and accountability. Harmful rhetoric and
demonization along racial, cultural and religious lines
often led to conflict and violence and had no place in
any society. Intolerance and ignorance should not be
part of the way people viewed one another if mutual
respect and harmony were the goal.
50. Her delegation supported efforts to combat
religious defamation. It recognized the value of
diversity and felt strongly that it must do what it could
to combat intolerance.
51. Mr. Ashiki (Japan) said that discrimination based
on religion was illegal in his country. His Government
therefore took a great interest in the subject and
appreciated the improvements made to the draft
resolution since the previous year. The Government
had secured freedom of expression for its citizens as an
important human right. For that reason, Japan had
expressed a reservation regarding article 4 of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, and had abstained in
the vote on the draft resolution.
52. Mr. Suárez (Colombia) said that freedom of
worship and the equality of churches and religious
faiths before the law were enshrined in the Colombian
Constitution. His Government firmly believed that the
media could help promote greater understanding
among all religions, beliefs, cultures and peoples,
thereby facilitating dialogue among societies and
creating an environment conducive to the exchange of
human experiences.
* The delegation of Burkina Faso subsequently informed
the Committee that it had intended to vote in favour of
the draft resolution.A/C.3/62/SR.49
07-60481 10
53. Everyone had the right to freedom of expression.
The exercise of that right, despite carrying with it
special duties and responsibilities, could be subject
only to certain restrictions, as established in the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
His delegation had abstained in the vote on the draft
resolution because some parts of it, in particular
paragraph 10, contained restrictions on the right to
freedom of expression that were not in conformity with
article 19 of the Covenant.
54. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) expressed appreciation to all
delegations that had voted in favour of the draft
resolution, the adoption of which should put an end to
extremist trends that discriminated on the grounds of
race, religion and language. The spirit of understanding
that had reigned during informal consultations was
reflected in the revisions submitted by the
representative of Pakistan on behalf of OIC. His
delegation would have preferred that spirit to have
been reflected in the vote also and hoped that it would
have an impact on the vote in future years. Lastly, he
stressed that the Third Committee was indeed the place
to consider such resolutions since, according to the
Charter and the rules of procedure, it was responsible
for social, humanitarian and cultural issues, of which
human-rights issues were just a part.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/62/L.37/Rev.1)
55. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that
at their 2006 Summit Conference, the Heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned Countries had re-
emphasized that the exploitation of human rights for
political purposes, including selective targeting of
individual countries for extraneous considerations,
should be prohibited. Cuba, in its capacity as Chair of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement, encouraged all members of the Movement
to adhere to those principles when casting their votes
on country-specific draft resolutions.
56. Ms. Martins (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the European Union
always tried to conduct the negotiation of country-
specific draft resolutions in a way that provided a
platform for dialogue with the country concerned and
other interested delegations. The General Assembly
would undermine its own credibility if it remained
silent on grave and widespread violations of human
rights in situations where the country concerned
refused to cooperate, or where an approach based on
dialogue would lead to a result not reflecting the
gravity of the situation. The General Assembly had the
obligation to alert the international community to those
violations.
57. The European Union did not view the creation of
the Human Rights Council as precluding the General
Assembly from adopting country-specific resolutions.
The creation of the universal periodic review was
intended to reinforce the protection of victims of
human-rights violations and to complement, rather than
replace, the existing instruments. The universal
periodic review was a regular exercise with a four-year
rotation span. The victims of urgent and exceptional
human-rights situations could not afford to wait four
years. The international community must not shy away
from its responsibilities and use procedural motions to
avoid debate on country resolutions. That would be
tantamount to telling the victims of human-rights
abuses that their suffering could not even be addressed
by the General Assembly.
58. Mr. Sangqu (South Africa) said that one of the
reasons for creating the Human Rights Council had
been to have a body with credibility to address all
human-rights issues, including country-specific
resolutions. The Human Rights Council had been
created to ensure that all human rights were addressed
in a non-selective, non-politicized manner and thereby
eliminate double standards. It must therefore be
allowed to do its work as spelled out in its founding
resolution. His delegation shared the concerns
expressed by the representative of Cuba, speaking as
Chair of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
59. Mr. Butagira (Uganda) said that one reason for
setting up the Human Rights Council had been to
encourage dialogue rather than the demonization of
some countries. The Council had started on the right
course, but was not being given an opportunity to
work. He was not concerned at the moment about the
merits of specific draft resolutions. The issue was to
encourage the Council to function. All country-specific
human-rights resolutions must first be submitted to the
Human Rights Council, and his delegation would
oppose any action that would undermine the role of the
Council.A/C.3/62/SR.49
11 07-60481
60. Mr. Sergiwa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that
his delegation rejected any draft resolution that
targeted specific countries, for it would foster a policy
of confrontation, complicate the effort to find
appropriate solutions to human-rights issues within
States and offer an opportunity to settle political
accounts, exert pressure on the target States and falsify
their human-rights records.
61. The best way to approach human-rights questions
was to avoid double standards and take into account
the different religious, cultural and social
particularities of peoples, having recourse to objective
dialogue based on mutual respect, impartiality and
transparency. A mechanism for universal periodic
review had been agreed on in the Human Rights
Council to avoid the selectivity and politicization that
had characterized the Commission on Human Rights.
62. It had also been agreed that work on that
mechanism would commence during the first half of
the coming year, and hopes were pinned on it to review
the human-rights situation in all Member States.
Human-rights questions in specific countries should be
left to that mechanism, which represented a
compromise between different tendencies and
geographical blocs.
63. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation wished to express its total rejection of the
selective exploitation of human-rights issues aimed at
interfering in the internal affairs of States on the
pretext of defending those rights. Such action violated
the principle of the sovereign equality of all Member
States under the Charter.
64. Responsible, objective dialogue and
understanding based on mutual respect for national
sovereignty and territorial integrity, transparency,
absence of selectiveness and avoidance of superior,
hegemonistic attitudes in international relations
represented the proper way to bring rapprochement
between States and enhance cooperation for the
protection of human rights.
65. Her delegation would therefore vote that no
action should be taken on the draft, and, should it be
put to a vote, would vote against it.
66. Mr. Saeed (Sudan), said that country-specific
resolutions were one of the worst legacies of the
Commission on Human Rights and a clear example of the
double standards that had characterized its work and
ultimately led to its replacement by the Human Rights
Council, which aimed to strengthen human rights through
dialogue, cooperation and non-confrontation. The
institution-building package recently adopted by the
Committee included modalities for the universal periodic
review. The fact that all States would be subject to review
would help prevent selectivity and the targeting of
developing countries. The States in question would
participate fully in drafting the primary document on
which the review would be based. Country-specific
resolutions would not contribute in any way to meeting
the Council’s objectives or to enhancing human rights,
but merely suited the political purposes of certain parties.
For that reason, his delegation would continue to reject
such resolutions.
67. Ms. Medal (Nicaragua) said that the Human
Rights Council, through the universal periodic review,
was the appropriate forum for considering human-
rights issues. The principles of universality,
impartiality, objectivity and non-selectivity must be
followed in order to ensure the consistency and
credibility of efforts to promote human rights.
68. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that
one of the basic purposes of the United Nations was to
serve as a forum in which the spotlight was shone on
human-rights violations and action was called to
correct them. He urged members to consider the
consequences of a no-action motion: it would give
perpetrators of human rights violations a sense of
comfort and immunity, while intensifying the
loneliness and helplessness of the victims. A successful
debate, on the other hand, would send the message to
perpetrators that the world was watching, and to the
victims, that they were not alone.
69. Ms. Nassau (Australia) said that the General
Assembly would undermine its own credibility if it
remained silent in situations of grave and widespread
violations of human rights. The Human Rights Council
had a mandate to address situations of human-rights
violations, but action in one forum did not preclude
action in others. Any country-specific resolution should
be considered on its own merits. No one who truly
opposed double standards could support any other
approach. Preventing debate on certain country
situations would create the impression that certain
countries were above or beyond consideration by
international human-rights bodies and would run
counter to the principles of universality and
interdependence of all human-rights issues.A/C.3/62/SR.49
07-60481 12
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.37/Rev.1. Situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
70. The Chairman said that the draft resolution
contained no programme-budget implications.
71. Ms. Tavares (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union and Japan, said that El Salvador,
Honduras and New Zealand had joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution. The sponsors’ aim was to call
attention to the systematic, widespread and grave
violations of human rights occurring in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, as reported by reliable
sources. The Government of that country was strongly
urged to respect fully all human rights and fundamental
freedoms and to resolve questions of international
concern relating to the abduction of foreigners. The
sponsors of the draft resolution had tried to engage the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in negotiations
on the text, but with no success. All efforts had been
made to ensure that the text was balanced and reflected
the concerns of all parties who were genuinely
interested in giving voice to the people of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In that regard,
and pursuant to extensive consultations with interested
delegations, a new preambular paragraph had been
added, welcoming the inter-Korean summit held in
October 2007 as well as the recent progress achieved in
the Six-Party Talks, and encouraging the improvement
of the human-rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, including through
effective follow-up.
72. The sponsors appealed to all States genuinely
interested in the promotion of human rights to enable
the General Assembly to give voice to the victims of
human-rights violations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea by voting in favour of the draft
resolution.
73. Mr. Oshima (Japan) said that the human-rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, including the abduction issue, was a matter of
serious international concern. The draft resolution
urged the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
work constructively with the United Nations human-
rights mechanisms. The High Commissioner for
Human Rights and her Office were ready to extend
technical cooperation, yet thus far, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had not responded
positively. It had also refused to allow the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to enter that
country. The Government should cooperate with and
grant full access to the Special Rapporteur, other
United Nations human-rights mechanisms and
humanitarian organizations. The abduction issue
remained unresolved. Japan strongly called upon the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respond to
the request contained in the draft resolution by letting
the abductees return to Japan and other countries of
origin without delay.
74. While the Human Rights Council had started its
activities, the Third Committee continued to play an
important role as the sole universal body within the
United Nations charged with addressing human-rights
issues. The Council had not completed its institution-
building and might need more time before it could
fully establish its working methods. The universal
periodic review would begin in 2008, but would not be
able to address the grave and continuing violations of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea until that country’s review was conducted two
years hence. It was incumbent upon the Third
Committee to extend support to those individuals and
their families whose human rights were being so
gravely violated. He appealed to all delegations to
support the draft resolution.
75. Mr. Pak (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that his delegation categorically rejected
the revised draft resolution because it was full of
fabricated information and had a sinister political
purpose. The ultimate goal of the United States and the
European Union was to eliminate his country’s ideas
and system and impose their values, and the revised
draft resolution constituted the culmination of
politicization, selectivity and double standards.
76. The text made no mention of gross human-rights
violations such as the United States invasion of Iraq,
with its attendant massacre of civilians; the
suppression of Korean residents in Japan; and the
discrimination against minorities in Western countries.
It was a clear demonstration of hypocrisy, and the
sponsors had made a serious miscalculation. His
country would remain steadfast in its determination to
consolidate and develop its socialist system.
77. His delegation called for a vote on the revised
draft resolution and hoped that all justice-loving
countries would vote against it.A/C.3/62/SR.49
13 07-60481
78. Mr. González (Costa Rica), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
human-rights situation in a number of countries was
deplorable, and he requested the Member States
concerned to respond to the international community’s
call for change.
79. However, such issues should be addressed by the
Human Rights Council. Only a few days before, the
Third Committee had adopted the institution-building
package of the Council, thereby making it the most
appropriate forum for such discussions. The universal
periodic review would help to strengthen the Council’s
credibility by examining all countries on an equal
basis. The Council should therefore be given the
opportunity to fulfil the role for which it had been
created, and he called on Member States to refrain
from dealing with the subject in the same way as at
previous sessions.
80. Ms. Moreira (Ecuador) said that although
human-rights situations throughout the world were a
matter of concern for the international community, they
should be examined by the universal periodic review
within the Human Rights Council, which had been
specifically set up for that purpose.
81. Believing that the Council was the only body
competent to review human-rights situations on a
non-selective basis, her country would abstain from
voting on country-specific draft resolutions in the
Third Committee.
82. His delegation fully supported all procedures
within the Human Rights Council, including thematic
mandates, and believed that specific, serious human-
rights violations should be examined by the Council at
special sessions.
83. Mr. Acharya (Nepal) said that his country was
extremely concerned about the abduction of foreigners,
and called upon the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to return the abductees immediately. His
delegation would nonetheless vote against the revised
draft resolution as a matter or principle. The recently
adopted institution-building package of the Human
Rights Council sought to address country-specific
issues, and the Third Committee should henceforth
focus on developing norms and looking into thematic
issues suggested by the Council.
84. Mr. Strigelsky (Belarus) said that Belarus
opposed politicized country-specific resolutions as a
matter of principle. The consideration of the human-
rights situation in a particular State fell to the Human
Rights Council, which possessed the relevant
independent and impartial machinery. States
responsible for violating human rights must be held to
account, but the extent to which they complied with
their human-rights obligations should be examined in a
civilized manner, with no one group of countries
allowed to impose their opinion. Country-specific
resolutions did not take account of alternative
viewpoints on delicate human-rights issues. Belarus
would therefore vote against the draft resolution.
85. Ms. Gendi (Egypt) said that her country
consistently rejected all resolutions which were based
on selectivity and double standards and which
politicized the approach to human-rights issues. Egypt
therefore voted against all draft resolutions on human-
rights situations in specific countries owing to its
profound belief that human-rights situations within
States must be dealt with through a cooperative
approach based on building States’ capacity to respect
human rights within their territory, not a
confrontational one based on reviling States for their
human-rights situations in accordance with the wishes
of States or groups of States acting as self-appointed
watchdogs of human rights throughout the world.
86. It considered that human-rights issues should be
dealt with through the Human Rights Council and its
periodic review mechanisms, disregarding levels of
economic development and political interests. It further
considered that the international assessment of human-
rights conditions must take into account cultural and
religious backgrounds and ethnic diversity, which were
unifying factors, rather than divisive elements used to
impose outside standards based on a false feeling of the
superiority of the cultures and religions of the States
that proposed such draft resolutions. Egypt would
therefore vote against the draft resolution.
87. Ms. Rodríguez de Ortiz (Venezuela) said that
her delegation opposed country-specific draft
resolutions introduced by certain countries for political
reasons. Such texts intervened in the affairs of
sovereign States and were used as instruments to
promote political interests. The sponsors of the draft
resolution had committed human-rights violations
themselves, and yet no resolutions had been submitted
against them; that was a further example of double
standards in the area of human rights.A/C.3/62/SR.49
07-60481 14
88. Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia) said that his
delegation would vote against the revised draft
resolution as it opposed country-specific texts. That
position should not be interpreted as condoning gross
violations of human rights, and he called on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to improve its
relations.
89. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.37/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Guinea,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Oman, Russian
Federation, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Benin,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Colombia,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, India, Jamaica,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, United Arab
Emirates, Yemen.
90. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.37/Rev.1 was adopted
by 97 votes to 23, with 60 abstentions.
91. Mr. Pham Hai Anh (Viet Nam) said that his
delegation had voted against the revised draft
resolution, as it did not support country-specific
resolutions. Human rights should be promoted through
dialogue and cooperation, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 60/251. However, he was
concerned about the issue of abductions in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
92. Mr. Singh (India) condemned the abduction of
nationals of one country by another. It shared the
anguish of the affected families and the Japanese
people.
93. Mr. Súarez (Colombia) said that his country had
suffered the harmful consequences of abductions
perpetrated by criminal organizations and had taken
successful measures to counter them. Urging Member
States to take decisive action, he expressed his
solidarity with the victims of abduction throughout the
world and called for the unconditional release of all
abductees.
94. Ms. Zhang Dan (China) said that her country
opposed any country-specific resolutions designed to
exert pressure on developing countries, such as the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which had
been taking steps to improve the situation. She hoped
that solutions could be found through dialogue and
cooperation.
95. Ms. Abdelhak (Algeria) said that her delegation
had voted against the revised draft resolution because
country-specific texts maintained a climate of
confrontation that was detrimental to human rights.A/C.3/62/SR.49
15 07-60481
The recently approved universal periodic review was
the most appropriate mechanism to examine human
rights.
96. Mr. Anshor (Indonesia) said that progress could
be achieved only through dialogue and cooperation on
the basis of mutual respect, and it was regrettable that
there had been no dialogue between the sponsors of the
draft resolution and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. Confrontational initiatives failed to bring
about significant change and, for that reason, his
delegation had voted against the revised draft
resolution.
97. Believing that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea should step up its efforts to fulfil its
obligations under various international human-rights
instruments, his delegation called upon that country to
pay heed to the legitimate concerns expressed by the
international community, especially regarding the
matter of abductions. His country was ready to extend
its cooperation to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in the area of human rights.
98. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) said that the draft
resolution had been a further example of selectivity
and double standards. His country was opposed to
country-specific texts and had accordingly voted
against the revised draft resolution.
99. Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) said that country-
specific resolutions could be useful in cases of serious
human-rights situations warranting the international
community’s attention, and as a complement to the
work of the Human Rights Council, but there should be
a better balance between the General Assembly and the
Council in the examination of human rights. The
universal periodic review was a useful tool to examine
human-rights situations in all countries, free from
selectivity and politicization. Those criteria had not
been met in the revised draft resolution, and his
country had therefore abstained in the voting.
100. Ms. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil) said that the
formation of the Human Rights Council had created an
enabling environment to address human rights through
dialogue. However, the lack of willingness on the part
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
engage in dialogue was worrying and warranted a clear
message. Her delegation had therefore voted in favour
of the revised draft resolution.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.