United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.40
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
24 March 2010
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-59988 (E)
*0959988*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 40th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 10 November 2009, at 10 a.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 41: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
Agenda item 61: Social development (continued)
Agenda item 62: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)A/C.3/64/SR.40
09-59988 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 41: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.52
and L.58)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.52: Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
1. Mr. Metso (Finland) said that the following
countries had joined the list of sponsors: Chile, France,
Ireland, Micronesia (Federated States of), Montenegro,
Thailand, Togo, Turkey, United States of America and
Zambia.
2. Recalling the objectives of the draft resolution
and summarizing the role of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
he stressed that the Office cooperated with various
categories of refugees and that partnerships played an
important part in the fulfilment of its mandate. It was
worth highlighting several elements of the draft
resolution: the commemoration of the two core
instruments on the rights of refugees; the internal
reform of UNHCR and, more generally, of
humanitarian action and of the United Nations; the
security of humanitarian workers; the issue of refugees
in urban settings; and the impact of climate change and
the economic and financial crisis, in particular on the
activities of UNHCR. Discussions on the draft
resolution had taken place in a positive spirit. He
called on delegations to adopt the text by consensus, as
had been the case in previous years.
3. The Chairperson said that the following
countries had joined the list of sponsors: Albania,
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Burundi, Cape Verde, Congo, Costa Rica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Guatemala,
Haiti, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi,
Morocco, Panama, Republic of Korea, Rwanda,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and United Republic of Tanzania.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.58: Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
4. Ms. Klopčič (Slovenia), introducing the draft
resolution, said that her country remained committed to
the objectives of the Programme of UNHCR, and
would continue to cooperate with all of the members of
its Executive Committee in order to find constructive
solutions to the issues at hand. Slovenia was
determined to improve the situation of refugees
through regional and international cooperation.
5. The Chairperson said that Afghanistan, Albania,
Belarus, Benin and Ecuador had joined the list of
sponsors.
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.50)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.50: Guidelines for the
Alternative Care of Children
6. Ms. Brichta (Brazil) said that the following
countries had joined the list of sponsors: Austria,
Dominican Republic, Italy, Netherlands, Peru,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Switzerland and
Turkey. She recalled that, on 17 June 2009, the Human
Rights Council had adopted by consensus resolution
11/7, which provided that the Guidelines should be
submitted to the General Assembly with a view to their
adoption on the twentieth anniversary of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. She hoped that
the draft resolution would be adopted by consensus.
7. The Chairperson said that the following
countries had joined the list of sponsors: Albania,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Benin, Comoros, Egypt and
Honduras.
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.51 and L.56)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.51: Universal realization of
the right of peoples to self-determination
8. Mr. Sial (Pakistan) said that Albania and the
Comoros had joined the list of sponsors. He stressed
that the right to self-determination was the most basic
right of peoples and nations and the essential
foundation of all human rights, and was enshrined in
the International Covenants on human rights. Under
international law, the right to self-determination was a
condition sine qua non for the realization of all other
rights; that right had enabled millions of oppressed
people to achieve freedom from colonialism, apartheid,
foreign occupation and alien domination. The text of
the draft resolution was identical to that adopted by
consensus at the sixty-third session of the GeneralA/C.3/64/SR.40
3 09-59988
Assembly; he hoped that it would be adopted by
consensus at the current session.
9. The Chairperson said that the following
countries had joined the list of sponsors: Bolivia, Côte
d’Ivoire, El Salvador, Kenya, Togo and Zimbabwe.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.56: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
10. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that the following
countries had joined the list of sponsors: Armenia,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Gabon, Ghana, Italy, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Monaco, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Slovenia and Spain.
11. The sponsors had once again submitted the draft
resolution because the Palestinian people continued to
suffer under Israeli occupation and to be deprived of
their fundamental rights, in particular their inalienable
right to self-determination. The sponsors would
continue to do so until that right was fully respected.
The current text was identical to that of the previous
year, with the exception of technical updates and of
references to the elements on which the negotiations
conducted in the context of the Middle East peace
process were founded.
12. The ninth preambular paragraph was particularly
important: it was only in their own territory that the
Palestinian people would be able to establish an
independent, sovereign and viable State and live in
peace and security alongside the State of Israel. He
hoped that the Member States would send a strong
message of solidarity and encouragement to the
Palestinian people by adopting the draft resolution by
consensus. He was confident that the support of the
international community would eventually allow the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable right to
self-determination in their own independent, sovereign
and viable State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
13. The Chairperson said that the following
countries had joined the list of sponsors: Antigua and
Barbuda, Belize, Croatia, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Iceland, Jamaica, Liberia, Norway, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Switzerland
and Uzbekistan.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/C.3/64/L.23/Rev.1 and L.24)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.23/Rev.1: Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
14. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Secretariat had confirmed that the draft
resolution had no programme budget implications
under section 23 (Human rights). For that reason, no
oral statement would be made referring to the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 45/248 in
relation to paragraph 37 of the draft resolution.
Attention was, however, drawn to the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 45/248 B, section VI, and
subsequent resolutions, the most recent of which was
resolution 62/236, in which the General Assembly
reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee was the
appropriate Main Committee entrusted with
responsibilities for administrative and budgetary
matters, and reaffirmed the role of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
in that regard.
15. Ms. Raabymagle (Denmark) said that the United
Nations was based on a number of standards and
fundamental principles to which all Member States
subscribed. One of those principles was the absolute
prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment. In plain and
unequivocal terms, article 5 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights provided that no one
should be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment. All subsequent
relevant international and regional instruments
reaffirmed that principle, which underlay the faith of
the international community in the dignity of every
human being throughout the world. So long as that
scourge continued to exist, the United Nations must
speak out and denounce it.
16. The draft resolution was a result of bilateral
meetings and informal consultations with a number of
interested delegations. It referred in particular to the
obligation of States to examine and follow up all
allegations of torture, and called upon States to include
in their domestic legislation the absolute prohibition of
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment. It was regrettable that despite
developments in jurisprudence over recent years, noA/C.3/64/SR.40
09-59988 4
consensus had been reached regarding the paragraph on
corporal punishment, and it had therefore been
necessary to remove that paragraph.
17. She was grateful to all delegations for their
participation and constructive efforts. The shared
objective throughout the discussions had been to arrive
at a consensus text.
18. She was pleased to announce that Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Jordan, Maldives, Mali,
Nicaragua, Panama, Turkey, Ukraine and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the list of
sponsors.
19. She was grateful to all partners for their
commitment and interest, and called on all delegations
that had not yet done so to join the 82 sponsors.
20. The Chairperson said that Angola, Belize, Chad,
Israel, Morocco, San Marino and Seychelles had joined
the list of sponsors.
21. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.23/Rev.1 was adopted.
22. Ms. Zhang (China), speaking in explanation of
position following the adoption of the draft resolution,
said that as one of the first States to sign the United
Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
China firmly supported the efforts of the international
community to combat that scourge. Her delegation was
grateful that the main sponsor of the draft resolution
had held several informal consultations; it had taken
part in those consultations and had shown great
flexibility with a view to reaching a consensus.
23. She wished to make a number of clarifications
regarding the text that had been adopted. First, the
Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment, in his report to
the General Assembly, had made unfounded
accusations against Member States. Her delegation
rejected such irresponsible acts and wished to
dissociate itself from paragraph 29 of the draft
resolution.
24. Second, by adopting the draft resolution, the
Committee intended not only to encourage Member
States to pay greater attention to the question of
torture, but also to encourage the relevant United
Nations bodies and mechanisms to improve their work.
During consultations, her delegation had therefore
proposed adding a phrase requesting the Special
Rapporteur to abide by the code of conduct for special
procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights
Council and carry out his work in accordance with his
mandate. Although many developing countries had
supported the insertion of that phrase, it had regrettably
not been included in the final text. Third, paragraph 4
of the draft resolution emphasized the importance of
States ensuring proper follow-up to the
recommendations and conclusions of the treaty bodies
and mechanisms established under the relevant
international instruments. Her delegation believed that
the role of States in that regard was rather, on the basis
of the principles of objectivity and impartiality, to
study and apply those recommendations in a
responsible manner, taking into account their own
national conditions. China rejected, and could not
implement, the conclusions and recommendations of
bodies established under biased and politicized treaties.
Her country would, however, continue to promote and
uphold respect for and protection of human rights, and
would continue to cooperate with the bodies
established under the relevant human rights
instruments on the basis of equality and mutual respect.
Her delegation requested that its statement be reflected
in the summary record.
25. Ms. Sapag (Chile) commended the impressive
work carried out by the delegation of Denmark;
however, her delegation would have preferred the
reference to capital punishment to be preserved. Her
delegation called on all of the delegations that had
taken part in the consultations to bear that point in
mind, since the death penalty was the most cruel and
serious punishment that could be inflicted on a human
being.
26. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation associated itself with the consensus and
supported the efforts of the international community to
combat torture. According to the draft resolution,
States must duly meet their obligations with respect to
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, and therefore a state or threat
of war, political instability or any other emergency
could not be used to justify torture. Her delegation
wished to have that point included in the summary
record of the meeting.
27. Mr. Ndimeni (South Africa) said that, while his
delegation had joined in the consensus, it had hoped
that the draft resolution would give greater
consideration to contemporary forms of torture andA/C.3/64/SR.40
5 09-59988
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment and other issues, particularly in relation to
the closure of the Guantanamo detention centre and the
question of the liability of the perpetrators of acts of
torture and how a fair and effective remedy could be
found in accordance with the fundamental principles
and guidelines on the right to recourse and reparations
for victims of flagrant violations of international
human rights law and serious breaches of international
humanitarian law. His delegation had hoped that those
elements would be included in the draft resolution, but
it would pursue bilateral contacts as agreed with the
main sponsors.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.27 to L.34,
L.38 to L.41 and L.44 to L.49)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.27: Combating defamation
of religions
28. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of Belarus, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
29. The draft resolution introduced each year stressed
the need to provide adequate protection against acts of
hatred, discrimination, intimidation and coercion and
to take all possible measures to promote tolerance and
respect for all religions. It also considered the
relationship between religion and race and multiple or
aggravated forms of discrimination. Lastly, it
reaffirmed that the freedom of opinion and expression
enshrined in international human rights law must be
exercised responsibly to ensure that they did not lead
to the denigration of religions and therefore called for
respect both for that freedom and for religions. The
Organization of the Islamic Conference hoped that
mutual trust and understanding could be achieved
through a constructive dialogue on the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.28: Promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order
30. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Pakistan, Paraguay and
Uganda. She recalled that the draft resolution, which
was submitted to the Committee every year, was
particularly important in the light of the current
economic and financial crisis, which mainly affected
developing countries even though they were not
responsible for it. The draft resolution reiterated that
the international order should guarantee the full
enjoyment of human rights by all. With reference to the
seventeenth preambular paragraph, she requested that
the phrase “small island developing States” should be
capitalized in the Spanish and English versions of the
text.
31. The Chairperson announced that Algeria, the
Congo and Lebanon also wished to sponsor the draft
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.29: Strengthening
United Nations action in the field of human rights
through the promotion of international cooperation
and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality
and objectivity
32. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Cambodia, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ecuador, Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, Pakistan, Russian
Federation and Turkmenistan.
33. The draft resolution, which was submitted to the
Committee every two years, contained new elements
and in particular advocated the elimination of double
standards and respect for the principles of
non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity, including
in the context of the universal periodic review.
Recalling that the draft resolution had been adopted by
consensus in previous years, she expressed the hope
that that would also be the case at the sixty-fourth
session.
34. The Chairperson announced that Rwanda also
wished to become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.30: The right to food
35. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Azerbaijan, Barbados,
Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
China, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ecuador, Guinea-
Bissau, Indonesia, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Lebanon,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Maldives, Monaco, Montenegro,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Portugal,A/C.3/64/SR.40
09-59988 6
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Suriname, Switzerland, Tuvalu,
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia.
36. She noted that, while the right to food was
internationally recognized as a fundamental right,
nearly 1 billion people currently suffered from hunger
because of the food crisis, which had the greatest
impact on people in developing countries. The draft
resolution reiterated that hunger was an outrage to
human dignity that required the adoption of urgent
measures at the national, regional and international
levels and the mobilization of technical and financial
resources from all sources to guarantee food security
for all. She announced that some sections of the
previous year’s text had been changed during the
informal consultations and that the changes would
appear in a new version of the text under the symbol
A/C.3/64/L.30/Rev.1.
37. The Chairperson announced that the following
countries also wished to sponsor the draft resolution:
Bahamas, Belize, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cyprus,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Italy, Jamaica,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Philippines, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia,
San Marino, Slovenia, Spain, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago and
Yemen.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.31: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
38. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Burundi, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Comoros, Congo, Djibouti, Gabon, Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti, Kenya, Liberia, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sierra Leone, Somalia and Suriname.
39. In his view, the growing number of countries
sponsoring the draft resolution, which was submitted
annually, demonstrated the significance of the issue.
He stressed that the goal was not to prejudge the course
of globalization or to make value judgments, but rather
to grasp the complexity of the changes in
communications and production as well as in
technological tools and the impact of many current
phenomena in order to seek ways to improve the
enjoyment of all human rights in the modern world and
to ensure that the international community was better
equipped to meet new challenges and take advantage of
new opportunities. Granted, globalization had its
advantages, but greater attention must be paid to the
fact that neither the benefits nor the costs were shared
equally.
40. Seeing an opportunity to reconcile — or even
unify — views on aspects of globalization relating to
human rights, Egypt hoped that one outcome of the
discussions of the Secretary-General’s recent report
would be a better understanding of the phenomenon
that would lead to greater cooperation in mitigating its
negative impact. The sponsors of the draft resolution,
wishing to promote a consensus-based approach, called
on all Member States to cooperate in the
implementation of the resolution that would be
adopted.
41. The Chairperson announced that Lesotho and
Uzbekistan had become sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.32: National institutions
for the promotion and protection of human rights
42. Mr. Schroeer (Germany) said that Israel and
Serbia had become sponsors of the draft resolution.
Recalling that the draft resolution was based on
General Assembly resolution 63/172, submitted by
Germany for the first time in 2008 and adopted by
consensus, he underlined its main points and noted the
technical updates and additions that had been made to
the resolution from the previous year, including a
reference to the related report (A/64/320) and the
establishment of a biennial periodicity for the
Secretary-General’s reports on the issue. His delegation
had been unable to simplify the draft resolution as
much as it would have wished, because some of the
sponsors were attached to certain parts of resolution
63/172, but that the draft resolution was nevertheless
shorter than the previous resolution.
43. The Chairperson announced that the following
countries also wished to become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Benin, Cape
Verde, Ecuador, Georgia, Honduras, Iceland, Mongolia,
Nigeria, Peru, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Sri Lanka, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.33: Follow-up to the
International Year of Human Rights Learning
44. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) said that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:A/C.3/64/SR.40
7 09-59988
Argentina, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Dominican Republic, Luxembourg, Peru and Spain. He
said that, compared to earlier years, the sponsors, who
hoped that the draft resolution would again be adopted
by consensus, had wished to deepen the notion of
human rights learning by adding the fifth preambular
paragraph and four new paragraphs, including
paragraph 4, which was particularly important.
45. The Chairperson announced that the following
countries also wished to become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Albania, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Belize, Chile, Cyprus, Colombia, Croatia,
Ecuador, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Italy,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia and Slovenia.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.34: Protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons
46. Mr. Michelsen (Norway) said that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Angola, Armenia, Australia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, Czech Republic, France, Greece, Honduras,
Hungary, Ireland, Mexico, Peru, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia and United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland. He recalled that the draft
resolution, which was introduced by Norway every two
years, traditionally received universal support and
stressed that 26 million persons were currently
internally displaced owing to armed conflict,
generalized violence or human rights violations in all
regions of the world, and that some 36 million others
were internally displaced as a result of natural
disasters. He emphasized that, by adopting the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would call upon
States to find durable solutions for displaced persons,
would welcome the fact that a growing number of
countries had adopted domestic legislation covering all
stages of displacement and would note that the number
of displaced persons owing to natural disasters was
liable to rise, particularly under the impact of climate
change.
47. The Chairperson announced that the following
countries also wished to sponsor the draft resolution:
Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Italy, Liberia,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Portugal, Sierra
Leone and Uganda.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.38: Declaration on the
Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and
Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
48. Ms. Tvedt (Norway) said that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Andorra, Angola, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Chile, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Guatemala,
Honduras, Iraq, Italy, Jordan, Mexico, Monaco, New
Zealand, Panama, Peru, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, United States of America and Uruguay.
She hoped that the draft resolution, which Norway
submitted every two years and which traditionally
received universal support, would once again be
adopted without a vote. Thanking those States that had
participated in the informal consultations, she said that
the consultations would continue and that a revised text
would be introduced early the following week.
49. The Chairperson announced that the following
countries wished to become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Benin, Cape Verde, Cyprus, Dominican
Republic, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Montenegro, Republic of Korea, San Marino, Slovakia
and Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.39: Elimination of all forms
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion
or belief
50. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden) said that the
following countries had become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Benin, Chile, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Honduras, Monaco, New Zealand, Panama,
Serbia and Uruguay. The draft was based primarily on
texts that had been approved in previous years, except
for some new elements that had been added to address
the growing problem of violence against persons
belonging to religious minorities throughout the world,
a problem to which Governments and other authorities
must find a solution. Consultations were continuing;
adoption of the draft resolution would reaffirm the
international community’s determination to eliminate
all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on
religion or belief, while promoting freedom of religion
and conscience.
51. The Chairperson announced that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Angola, Cape Verde, Colombia, Costa Rica, Georgia,A/C.3/64/SR.40
09-59988 8
Haiti, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, San Marino, Sri Lanka
and Vanuatu.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.40: Subregional Centre
for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
52. Ms. Mballa Eyenga (Cameroon) said that the
following countries had become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Austria, Chile, Comoros, Liberia, Niger,
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. The
objective of the draft resolution was to secure Member
States’ support for the Centre and to inform them of the
Centre’s activities. The purpose of the Centre was to
contribute to the training of staff responsible for
managing activities related to human rights and
democracy; support the establishment or strengthening
of competent national institutions; help disseminate
relevant international instruments; and, lastly, prevent
conflicts and promote sustainable peace and
development and the establishment of a culture of
democracy and the rule of law in the subregion.
53. The draft resolution was almost identical to
resolution 63/177, except for a few technical updates
and the new paragraph 4. The draft resolution would
henceforth be presented every two years,
demonstrating that the Centre was on the right track
after eight years of operation.
54. The Chairperson announced that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Belgium, Chile, Costa
Rica, Ghana, Haiti, Honduras, Malawi, Mali, Morocco,
Portugal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Uganda and United States
of America.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.41: Protection of migrants
55. Mr. González (Mexico) said that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Albania, Belarus, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Indonesia, Kyrgyzstan, Mali and
Morocco. The sponsors of the draft resolution had
restructured it for the sake of greater clarity, by linking
the human rights of migrants with the corresponding
obligations of States. The text considered the
phenomenon of migration from a broader perspective,
taking into account the fact that migrant workers were
among the people most vulnerable to the effects of the
current global economic and financial crisis. As
Member States had participated actively in the
consultations, the draft had obtained almost all the
necessary support for its adoption by consensus.
However, he urged delegations that had not yet done so
to become sponsors.
56. The Chairperson announced that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Congo, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Niger, Senegal and
Uganda.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.44: United Nations Decade
for People of African Descent
57. Mr. Suarez (Colombia), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.44 on behalf of the sponsors,
which had been joined by the Dominican Republic,
said that the obstacles faced by people of African
descent in fully exercising their rights in all areas had
been documented in several studies and reports of
entities of the United Nations system, including the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean.
58. While some of the sponsors of the draft
resolution, including Colombia, were among the
countries with the highest concentration of people of
African descent, he hoped that the entire international
community would support the draft resolution.
59. The Chairperson announced that Belarus,
Bolivia, Honduras and Senegal had become sponsors of
the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.45: Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures
60. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.45 on behalf of the member
States of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
said that the third preambular paragraph of the draft
resolution should be amended to read as follows:
“Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to resolution 1999/21 of the
Commission on Human Rights of 23 April 1999, and
the reports of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolutions 52/120 of 12 December
1997, 55/110 of 4 December 2000 and 63/179 of
18 December 2008”. In addition, the reference to
footnote 2 should be moved to the end of the paragraph
and all the footnote references contained in the
paragraph should be renumbered accordingly.
61. The Chairperson announced that China and
Jamaica had become sponsors of the draft resolution.A/C.3/64/SR.40
9 09-59988
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.46: Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights
62. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.46 on behalf of the member
States of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
said that, in the third preambular paragraph, the word
“Switzerland” should be added after the word
“Geneva”. She hoped that the draft resolution would be
adopted by consensus as at past sessions of the
Assembly.
63. The Chairperson announced that China had
become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.47: The right
to development
64. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.47 on behalf of the member
States of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
65. The Chairperson announced that China had
become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.48: The promotion of
equitable geographical distribution in the membership
of the human rights treaty bodies
66. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.48 on behalf of the member
States of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
said that a draft resolution on the question would
henceforth be presented every two years. In paragraph
3 of the draft resolution, the word “conference” should
be replaced by the words “meeting or conference”.
67. The Chairperson announced that China had
become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.49: Human rights and
cultural diversity
68. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.49 on behalf of the member
States of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
said that a draft resolution on the question would
henceforth be presented every two years. She hoped
that the draft resolution would be adopted by
consensus, as in the past.
69. The Chairperson announced that China had
become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/64/L.35 to L.37)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.35: Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
70. Ms. Mirow (Sweden), speaking on behalf of the
European Union and Japan, introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of its sponsors, which had been
joined by Saint Lucia, Tuvalu and Vanuatu. The draft
resolution took note of some positive developments
that had been observed in relations between the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and certain
international human rights organizations, but expressed
concern about the absence of any concrete
improvement in the situation in that country. The
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea had been kept informed of progress on the
formulation of the draft resolution, but it had refused to
participate in the process. The sponsors hoped that the
draft resolution would be supported by as many
delegations as possible if it was put to a vote.
71. The Chairperson announced that El Salvador
had become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.36: Situation of human
rights in Myanmar
72. Ms. Schlyter (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the draft resolution was
shorter than that adopted at the previous session. She
hoped that Myanmar would continue to cooperate with
the sponsors and that the draft resolution would be
adopted by consensus.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.37: Situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
73. Mr. Normandin (Canada), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, noted that it was
based largely on the report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
63/191 (A/64/357). He called on Member States to
assume their collective responsibility to draw attention
to particularly alarming situations in the area of human
rights, taking into account the report which the
Secretary-General had submitted at their request.
Despite its contention that cooperation was more
effective than resolutions, the Islamic Republic of Iran
was still refusing to cooperate with the relevant
institutions, mandate holders and mechanisms. TheA/C.3/64/SR.40
09-59988 10
sponsors hoped that the draft resolution would receive
broad support.
Agenda item 61: Social development (continued)
(A/C.3/64/L.5/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.5/Rev.1: Inclusion of
persons with disabilities in realizing the Millennium
Development Goals
74. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.
75. Ms. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania),
introducing draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.5/Rev.1, said
that China, Finland, Indonesia, Ireland, Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey and the United States of America had
become sponsors.
76. In the context of the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals, it was important not
to exclude more than 10 per cent of the world’s
population: persons with disabilities. As had been
noted in recent years, particularly during the
negotiation and adoption of the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, it was absolutely
necessary to improve the situation of persons with
disabilities by increasing their visibility. The draft
resolution was intended to complement the resolution
adopted by the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session. Her delegation and the delegation of the
Philippines, which were jointly introducing the draft
resolution, were gratified by the support received from
other delegations and hoped that the draft resolution
would be adopted by consensus.
77. The Chairperson announced that the following
countries had become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina
Faso, Cape Verde, Chad, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, France,
Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Haiti, Iceland, India,
Israel, Jamaica, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Lithuania, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Peru,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Uganda and Zimbabwe.
78. The Chairperson said that he took it that the
Committee wished to adopt draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.5/Rev.1 without a vote.
79. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.5/Rev.1 was adopted.
Agenda item 62: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/64/L.19)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.19: Improvement of the
situation of women in rural areas
80. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications. At the time of
the introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries had become sponsors: Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Cameroon, Chile, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ethiopia, Haiti, Iraq, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Morocco,
Mozambique, Paraguay, Peru, Thailand and Zimbabwe.
81. Ms. Ochir (Mongolia) said that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries had also become sponsors: Algeria,
Argentina, Bolivia, Cape Verde, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Kenya,
Liberia, Malawi, Malaysia, Mexico, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey
and United States of America.
82. As a result of extensive informal consultations
among Member States, a number of revisions had been
made to the draft resolution.
83. In the seventh preambular paragraph, the phrase
“the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development”
should be replaced with the phrase “recalling the
Follow-up International Conference on Financing for
Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha”.
84. In the last line of the English version of
paragraph 2 (f), a comma should be inserted after the
words “reproductive health”. In the same line, the word
“prevention,” and the word “services” should be
inserted after the words “HIV/AIDS” and “care and
support”, respectively. The last line of subparagraph (f)
would thus read: “of sexual and reproductive health,
and HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, care and support
services”.A/C.3/64/SR.40
11 09-59988
85. In subparagraph (g), the phrase “increased
financial resources” should be replaced with the words
“resource generation”.
86. The phrase “as well as quality, affordable and
universally accessible primary health care and
services” should be inserted after the words “sexual
and reproductive health”.
87. In subparagraph (j), the words “their equal
access” should be replaced with the phrase “access on
an equal basis”.
88. In subparagraph (r), the phrase “where private
ownership of land and property exists” should be
deleted. In addition, the words “and lease” should be
inserted after the phrase “equal rights to own” and,
following the phrase “and undertaking administrative
reforms and”, the word “other” should be replaced with
the word “all”. The subparagraph should thus read:
“Designing, revising and implementing laws to ensure
that rural women are accorded full and equal rights to
own and lease land and other property, including
through the right to inheritance, and undertaking
administrative reforms and all necessary measures to
give women the same right as men to credit, capital,
appropriate technologies and access to markets and
information”.
89. In paragraph 2 (t), the word “Increasing” should
be replaced with the word “Developing”. The phrase
“, while acknowledging technical assistance of relevant
United Nations agencies” should be inserted at the end
of the subparagraph.
90. In paragraph 3, the phrase “Urges Governments”
should be replaced with the phrase “Strongly
encourages Member States”. Following the words “to
identify and address”, the article “the” should be
replaced with the word “any” and consequently the
word “impacts” should be changed to the singular.
Paragraph 3 would thus read: “Strongly encourages
Member States, United Nations entities and all other
relevant stakeholders to take measures to identify and
address any negative impact of the current global crises
on women in rural areas, including legislation, policies
and programmes that strengthen gender equality and
the empowerment of women”.
91. In conclusion, her delegation expressed
appreciation to all those who had worked
constructively during the informal consultations to
finalize the text of the draft resolution, which she
hoped would be adopted, as in the past, by consensus.
92. The Chairperson said that Belize, Bhutan,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chad, Comoros, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
India, Israel, Lebanon, Lesotho, Madagascar, Rwanda,
Seychelles, Togo, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay and Zambia had become sponsors of the draft
resolution as orally revised.
93. He took it that the Committee wished to adopt the
draft resolution as orally revised without a vote.
94. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.19 was adopted.
Rights of reply
95. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea), speaking in exercise of the right of reply,
said that his delegation categorically rejected draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.35, introduced on behalf of the
European Union and Japan, as it was full of
fabrications and nothing more than a product of
political conspiracy by hostile forces.
96. Since the end of the Second World War, and
particularly since the deployment of troops in the
southern part of Korea, the Korean peninsula had been
a theatre of confrontation between the East and the
West and, following the end of the cold war, between
the North and the South. For some, the protection of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea was protection only in name. Their main
concern was not so much to protect human rights in
that country as to protect their own political interests
and to deny and obliterate the State and social system
in place there. That was a serious error, as neither
denial, nor obliteration could harm the socialist system
chosen and defended by the Koreans themselves. Such
futile and meaningless resolutions could continue to be
introduced, but they would never destroy the people-
centred socialist system of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
97. Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran),
speaking in exercise of the right of reply, said that,
once again, Canada had introduced a draft resolution
containing significant inaccuracies and biased
information on the human rights situation in his
country. The Canadian delegation maintained that the
General Assembly had expressed grave concern at theA/C.3/64/SR.40
09-59988 12
human rights situation in Iran in the previous year.
However, it should be noted that, upon examination,
the list of sponsors of the draft resolution comprised
representatives not of the international community, but
rather of the European Union, as well as other
countries that attempted to impose their values and
cultures on others and that, in some cases, were
ignorant of the geographical location of Iran or even of
the continent on which it was found. It was sad and
regrettable that over the past few months and through
various means, countries like Canada had encouraged
others to vote in favour of the draft resolution. It was
also deplorable that Canada, together with two or three
other countries, was using the Committee for political
purposes and continued to apply double standards —
patent proof that they were not in the least concerned
about the human rights situation in other countries. The
draft resolution did not in any way reflect the human
rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran; his
delegation categorically rejected it, as it lacked all
objectivity and credibility in both form and substance.
98. If Canada was truly concerned about human
rights, it should attempt to improve its own record. The
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
had expressed concern at the fact that minority groups
in Canada, in particular African Canadians and
indigenous peoples, continued to face discrimination in
recruitment, remuneration and job security, and were
significantly underrepresented in public office and
Government positions. The Committee had also
expressed deep concern about the deplorable living
conditions of the Canadian indigenous peoples. The
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women had noted that a disproportionate
number of indigenous women in Canada were
incarcerated; the same was true of African Canadian
women and other women of colour. It had also
expressed concern that such women continued to suffer
from multiple forms of discrimination, particularly in
terms of access to employment, housing, education and
health care. In conclusion, Canada’s decision to
introduce a country-specific draft resolution in the
Committee was a clear abuse of United Nations human
rights mechanisms for political ambitions. His
delegation therefore called on Member States to reject
such tactics, which only damaged the credibility of the
Organization.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.