United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.26
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
12 November 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-56529 (E)
*0756529*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 26th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 26 October 2007, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with DisabilitiesA/C.3/62/SR.26
07-56529 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/62/36, 369 and 464)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (A/62/183, 207, 212, 214, 218, 222, 225,
227, 254, 255, 265, 280, 286, 287, 288, 289, 293,
298, 304, 317; A/C.3/62/3)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (A/62/213, 223,
263, 264, 275, 313, 318, 354 and 498)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (A/62/230)
1. Mr. Alston (Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions) said that 2007
marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of the first human
rights thematic special rapporteurship, which dealt with
extrajudicial killings. For that reason and because of
the review of mandates currently being undertaken by
the Human Rights Council, his report (A/62/265)
contained a historical review of the evolution of the
mandate. The themes he had selected to illustrate that
evolution were counter-terrorism, the protection of
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
the issue of non-State actors.
2. With regard to non-State actors, he had made a
special effort over the previous three years to
demonstrate that special procedures could and should
respond to abuses committed by rebels and other armed
opposition groups. That view had not been widely
accepted a decade earlier. Today, however,
Governments increasingly agreed that there was a need
to engage with any armed group that violated human
rights.
3. Several conclusions had emerged from his
review. First, though the initial formulation of special
procedures mandates was inevitably narrow, such
mandates evolved in response to factors such as
additional demands by States, new forms of violations,
increasing public demands for effective responses and
the development of new techniques and expectations
within the broader human rights regime. The ability to
adapt and evolve was essential.
4. Second, extrajudicial executions mandate
contradicted the stereotype of special procedures
involving Western experts focusing disproportionately
on Governments of developing countries. Despite the
regional diversity among previous Special Rapporteurs,
the general approach adopted had remained consistent
over time, and many of the incidents addressed had
alleged violations by developed country Governments.
5. Third, procedures went to the heart of the
potential effectiveness of a mandate such as his own.
He had sought to streamline the system of
communications, to respect the confines of the mandate
while acknowledging the broader context on country
visits, to limit the scope of his recommendations and to
be as precise as possible. Despite such endeavours,
productive engagement with Governments and with the
Human Rights Council remained an overwhelming
challenge. Accountability remained a prominent theme
in the debates on the Council’s new procedures and
practices.
6. The majority of Governments were failing the
basic test of accountability, a fact illustrated most
dramatically in relation to requests for visits. That
abdication of responsibility discouraged cooperation by
other States, rewarded uncooperative States and
established a system of impunity with regard to
concerns over extrajudicial executions. The impotence
of the Special Rapporteur in such situations made a
mockery of the special procedures in relation to
extrajudicial executions.
7. With regard to specific country situations, the
Islamic Republic of Iran had been a party to the
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights since 1968 and
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child since
1991. Both treaties banned the execution of juveniles,
yet Iran executed more juveniles than any other
countries. He had written on nine occasions to the
Iranian Government in that connection without
receiving a single response, and the executions
continued. Other major problems in Iran included the
imposition and carrying out of the death penalty for a
wide range of crimes that did not meet the
requirements of international law to restrict executions
to those guilty of the most serious crimes. Mass
executions had been reported increasingly in 2007,
sometimes occurring only a short time after arrest.
Such circumstances made a mockery of any pretence to
have respected due process rights. Lastly, the
provisions of the Penal Code which provided for
adulterers and others to be stoned to death remained in
force. Those laws were barbaric by any standards.A/C.3/62/SR.26
3 07-56529
8. Concerning the Philippines, he was aware that a
significant number of encouraging initiatives had been
taken since his visit. However, he continued to receive
deeply disturbing reports. The Government’s decision
to continue to establish barriers to Congressional
oversight of the military was disappointing, especially
after his interim report on the mission identified those
barriers as a key problem.
9. The Sri Lankan Government continued to contest
his characterization of the situation in that country as
an impending crisis, while the crisis continued to
worsen. The establishment of an international human
rights monitoring presence by the United Nations
would reduce significantly the number of human rights
abuses in Sri Lanka.
10. Mr. Ermita (Philippines) said he recognized that
many of the Special Rapporteur’s recommendations
had been made constructively. The Special
Rapporteur’s visit to the Philippines had sparked
enhanced national discussions on human rights
protection. The Special Rapporteur, the independent
Philippine Human Rights Commission and the Melo
Commission, created to investigate the activist and
media killings, had all concluded that there was no
State policy condoning or ordering such killings, and
had blamed rogue elements in uniform and members of
insurgency groups. However, the Government did not
shirk its responsibility to bring the perpetrators to
justice and prevent further killings. The Government
had recently reiterated instructions for security forces
to actively prevent human rights violations by rogue
men in uniform. His delegation shared the Special
Rapporteur’s desire to see results shortly, particularly
in the form of convictions. Six persons had already
been convicted.
11. The Government’s main institutional responses
included the establishment of a police task force to
investigate police, political and media killings, the
strengthening of the Presidential Human Rights
Committee and improvements of the witness protection
programme. The Commission on Human Rights had
been given additional funding. Also, to address the
charge of a culture of impunity, the President had
ordered security forces to investigate cases involving
men in uniform. The judiciary had established the
remedy of amparo, allowing victims to apply for
protective measures.
12. His delegation reaffirmed its commitment to
protecting and promoting human rights, and it reserved
the right to address the report more thoroughly when
the Special Rapporteur presented it formally before the
Human Rights Council.
13. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran)
said that his country and many other Member States
recognized capital punishment as an effective means of
protecting the right to life of potential victims of
serious crimes, including terrorism, drug trafficking
and sabotage. Sovereign States, not the Special
Rapporteur, should define the scope of the most serious
crimes in their domestic laws. It was well beyond the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur to pass judgement
on capital punishment according to a hidden personal
agenda. According to the report, a majority of countries
did not cooperate with the Special Rapporteur’s
mandate; one of the main reasons for that was the way
in which the Special Rapporteur conducted and
performed his mandate. He requested that the Special
Rapporteur should abide by and work within the remit
of his mandate, as defined by sovereign States. On the
question of juveniles, the statements made by the
Special Rapporteur were exaggerations. Iran was
abiding by due process and acting in accordance with
international and domestic laws, specifically the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
14. Ms. Castelo (Portugal), speaking on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey;
the stabilization and association process countries
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and
Serbia; and, in addition, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
Moldova, Norway and Ukraine, noted that the Special
Rapporteur would soon be submitting a report on the
situation worldwide with regard to extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions. She asked what the
most significant developments on the issue were and
how the Special Rapporteur thought the phenomenon
might be combated most effectively. She also requested
a brief description of the situation in Darfur in advance
of the final report of the Group of Experts on Darfur,
which would soon be released. She wondered whether
the Sudanese Government was acting on the Group’s
earlier recommendations. Lastly, with regard to the
lack of cooperation with the Special Rapporteur’s
requests for invitations to countries, she noted that
some of the countries involved were members of the
Human Rights Council and thus responsible forA/C.3/62/SR.26
07-56529 4
upholding the highest standards in the promotion and
protection of human rights, in accordance with the
resolution establishing the Council. She wondered
what steps were being taken to address that lack of
cooperation in response to requests by special
procedures mandate holders for visits.
15. Mr. Casal (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
said that the Special Rapporteur’s requests for an
invitation to visit his country were taken very
seriously, and that his Government hoped to be able to
respond positively to them as soon as possible.
Arrangements would be made to ensure optimal
conditions for the Special Rapporteur to pursue fully
his mandate. He would also appreciate the Special
Rapporteur’s thoughts about the legal definition of
deaths caused by private contractors hired by States in
the context of armed conflicts and about the
responsibility of States that might be involved in those
acts.
16. Mr. Chernenko (Russian Federation) said that
his delegation had listened with interest to the views of
the Special Rapporteur concerning non-State actors and
responsibility for human rights violations. It seemed
that States intentionally avoided responsibility for such
violations by blaming non-State actors. The use of
armed groups and private security companies was
becoming the norm in military actions, precisely
because of the impunity they enjoyed. His delegation
would be interested to hear the views of the Special
Rapporteur on the approach to be taken when such
auxiliary forces were established specifically in order
to avoid responsibility and control of their actions.
17. Ms. Norin (United States of America) said that
her country had extended an invitation to the Special
Rapporteur for a country visit, and that her
Government looked forward to working with him to
assure a constructive visit. The United States
appreciated the ongoing and constructive dialogue with
the Special Rapporteur about the appropriate scope of
his mandate when matters governed by the law of
armed conflict were involved. However, as the Special
Rapporteur himself recognized, determining
responsibility in such situations could be legally
complex. Her delegation looked forward to addressing
those issues in detail in future interactions.
18. Ms. Sutikno (Indonesia) said that, as the process
of review of special procedures was an ongoing one
undertaken by the Human Rights Council, her
delegation would refrain from commenting extensively
on the issue. Indonesia, an active member of the
Human Rights Council, had been cooperating with the
United Nations human rights mechanisms, inter alia by
accepting visits from three Special Rapporteurs in the
previous year alone, in addition to the recent visit of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. The High
Commissioner had expressed satisfaction with her visit
to Indonesia in a statement to the Third Committee,
and had presented a brief report on the country visit at
the sixth session of the Council.
19. Despite her country’s desire to welcome as many
visits as possible, she drew attention to the importance
of the Code of Conduct for Special Procedures
Mandate Holders and the principle of extending
invitations to visits by human rights observers based on
the consent of the countries concerned. Further,
extending an invitation to any Special Rapporteur
would require ensuring that the timing of the visit was
opportune and that the visit would involve as many
stakeholders as possible. Indonesia was in the process
of preparing for the visit of the Special Rapporteur on
torture, scheduled to take place in November 2007.
20. Ms. Colonne (Sri Lanka) said that since the visit
of the Special Rapporteur to her country in 2006,
notable developments had included the visit of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
who had acknowledged that the visit had been useful
and constructive. Her Government did not disregard its
responsibility to protect the rights of all its citizens and
had at no time shown reluctance to engage closely with
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner. A
detailed statement on additional measures taken in
Sri Lanka would be presented later in the Third
Committee’s debate on the agenda item. In 2007
Sri Lanka had received the Special Rapporteur on
torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment or punishment, and it would shortly be
hosting the representative of the Secretary-General on
internally displaced persons.
21. Mr. Ke Yousheng (China) said that China had a
complete set of domestic laws on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions. As a member of the
Human Rights Council, it had always attached
importance to meeting the commitments it had made
while campaigning for membership of the Council, and
had cooperated actively with its special procedures. In
recent years, China had received Special Rapporteurs
on torture, on freedom of religious belief and on theA/C.3/62/SR.26
5 07-56529
right to education, in addition to the Chairman of
the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention. His
Government would make its own plans and
arrangements for visits by different types of Special
Rapporteurs, in an order reflecting a balance between
different kinds of rights.
22. Mr. Menon (Singapore) said that his delegation
wished to address the allegations in the report
(A/62/265) to the effect that the Singapore Government
had refused the Special Rapporteur’s request to
conduct a country visit and had accused him of
pursuing a personal agenda that exceeded his mandate.
That was a misleading portrayal of events.
23. The mandate of the Special Rapporteur was
clearly defined, and was confined to extrajudicial,
summary and arbitrary executions, acts which
Singapore neither committed nor condoned. All capital
punishment cases were conducted in accordance with
the country’s laws and subject to judicial safeguards.
The integrity and transparency of Singapore’s legal
system was well known. All persons were ensured
Constitutional safeguards and due process of law.
24. The Special Rapporteur had chosen to ignore
those facts, and instead had used his position to
campaign against death sentences handed down by the
Courts. Such actions were clearly beyond the mandate
conferred on him by the former Commission on Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council. The Special
Rapporteur had issued public statements in his capacity
as a United Nations official asserting that the laws of
Singapore were inconsistent with international human
rights standards, ignoring the fact that capital
punishment was not prohibited under international law,
provided it was imposed according to due process of
law. His delegation also wished to remind the Special
Rapporteur that there was no international consensus
on whether capital punishment was a violation of
human rights. The question was one which every State
had the sovereign right to decide, taking into account
its own circumstances.
25. The Singapore Government recognized that
capital punishment was a severe penalty, imposed only
for the most serious crimes in accordance with the law.
It was an important component of Singapore’s legal
and justice system. Despite holding strong personal
views about capital punishment, the Special
Rapporteur should not abuse the authority of his office
to pursue a personal agenda, and certainly not on
limited United Nations resources.
26. In June 2007, the Human Rights Council had
adopted the Code of Conduct for Special Procedures
Mandate Holders, which stated that mandate holders
should bear in mind the need to ensure that their
personal political opinions were without prejudice to
the execution of their mission, and should base their
conclusions and recommendations on objective
assessments of human rights situations. If mandate
holders were to have the moral authority and
credibility to carry out their mandates, their conduct
must be above reproach. The Special Rapporteur would
do well to be reminded of that.
27. Mr. Karanja (Kenya) said that Kenya welcomed
the forthcoming visit of the Special Rapporteur
subsequent to the current general election period, after
the newly elected President had had time to form a
government.
28. Mr. Alston (Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions) expressed
appreciation to the many countries which had entered
into dialogue with him or which were considering
issuing an invitation for him to visit. He acknowledged
that balance and timing were important, but said that it
was particularly significant when a Government
avoided engagement on the subject of extrajudicial
executions.
29. Concerning the issue of private contractors,
which was currently being considered by the Working
Group on mercenaries, he said that the principal
responsibility for the actions of military contractors,
lay with the host State. In response to the recent
incidents in Iraq, the Iraqi cabinet had as a first step
rescinded the immunity provisions covering private
contractors. The sending country, however, should take
State responsibility for the observance of human rights
by those it employed.
30. With regard to the concerns raised by the
representative of Singapore, while on a three-week
visit to the country in his academic capacity, he had
been stuck by a newspaper article calling attention to
the plight of drug couriers from Singapore who had
been sentenced to death in other countries. Accused
drug couriers were far better off, however, in other
countries than they would be in Singapore, where a
mandatory death penalty was imposed for that offence
and 400 executions had been carried out over the pastA/C.3/62/SR.26
07-56529 6
15 years. There was not a single international human
rights body which had not concluded that the
mandatory death penalty imposed in Singapore for the
possession of very small quantities of drugs was a
violation of international law. The Law Society of
Singapore had recently presented a discussion paper to
the Government proposing that the provision should be
eliminated and citing the need to respond to emerging
values within Singaporean society itself.
31. In reply to the representative of the European
Union, he said that the Group of Experts on Darfur was
currently meeting, and expressed satisfaction at the
level of engagement of the Government of the Sudan.
The real test would come at the November 2007
meeting of the Group, when it discussed what measures
had actually been taken. On the subject of visits, it was
incumbent on Human Rights Council members to
engage directly with the special procedures.
32. He believed that the system of special procedures
was the crown jewel of the human rights system. The
fact that Governments maintained the system and
engaged with it was encouraging.
33. Mr. Menon (Singapore) said that the newspaper
article referred to by the Special Rapporteur had
appeared in the “Straits Times”, a local paper which
did not represent the views of the Government. The
proposal raised by the Law Society would be discussed
and decided internally. It was not for the Special
Rapporteur to tell the Government that it was obligated
to accept the proposal.
34. Ms. Jahangir (Special Rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief), introducing her report (A/62/280),
said that the effective protection and promotion of the
right to freedom of religion or belief posed serious
challenges to all States. Preventive measures were
crucial in that regard. Specific attention should be paid
to the situation of such vulnerable groups as women,
persons deprived of their liberty, refugees, children,
minorities and migrant workers. Refugees, asylum-
seekers and internally displaced persons were in a
situation of special vulnerability, which might also be
linked to their freedom of religion or belief. The legal
framework for refugee claims based on religion also
touched on the question what the terms “religion” and
“belief” encompassed.
35. Her report also addressed concerns raised by
atheistic and non-theistic believers and the protection
of the right not to profess any religion or belief. There
were worrying trends towards applying blasphemy
laws in a discriminatory manner, often
disproportionately punishing non-theists, atheists and
members of religious minorities.
36. The three main pillars of her mandate were
communications, country visits and thematic reports or
speeches. Since the inception of the mandate, more
than 1,100 allegation letters and urgent appeals had
been sent to a total of 130 States. Although 63.6
per cent of Governments on average replied to
communications annually, 20 States, four of which
were Human Rights Council members, had never
replied to a communication.
37. Country visits, the second pillar of the mandate,
enabled her to talk directly with governmental and
non-governmental representatives and gather first-hand
information. A total of 24 visits had been undertaken
by mandate holders. In 2007, she had visited Tajikistan
and the United Kingdom; a visit to Angola was
scheduled for November. She had also received
invitations from the Governments of India, Israel and
Turkmenistan.
38. Thematic studies and speeches at international
consultations gave her an opportunity to address issues
of concern in detail. She had recently collaborated with
the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance on a report entitled “Incitement to racial
and religious hatred and the promotion of tolerance”
(A/HRC/2/3) for the second session of the Human
Rights Council in September 2006. The categories of
her framework for communications to States had been
developed into an online digest illustrating
international standards, with excerpts of findings since
1986, which should serve as a useful tool for
Governments and non-governmental organizations
alike.
39. Both she and her predecessors had repeatedly
regretted the fact that freedom of religion or belief was
not a reality for many throughout the world. Religious
intolerance had increased, especially since 2001, and
actors working for peace and tolerance had been
marginalized. The two main strands of her mandate
deserved equal attention. On the one hand, freedom in
pursuing one’s religion or belief must be protected and
respected, and on the other, the rights of individuals
must not be violated on the premise of religion or
belief. Impunity should not be granted when criminalA/C.3/62/SR.26
7 07-56529
acts were given a religious label. At the same time,
Governments should be proportionate in their actions,
abide by the rule of law and respect international
human rights standards.
40. The appropriate role of Governments in
promoting freedom of religion or belief was to engage
in wise and balanced decision-making at all levels;
non-discriminatory legislation and an independent
judiciary were also crucial. Protection must be
complemented by prevention efforts. States should
devise proactive strategies to prevent acts of
intolerance and discrimination and identify possible
conflicts between communities of religion or belief in
advance. However, specific legislation should be
introduced with caution, since over-regulation could be
counterproductive. Inter-religious dialogue should be
encouraged, and should involve not only religious
leaders but initiatives at the grass-roots level.
Education could play an important preventive role,
especially when it ensured acceptance of pluralism and
diversity. She was currently involved in efforts by a
regional organization to develop guiding principles on
teaching about religions and beliefs in public schools.
41. There were several root causes of religious
intolerance, which varied from society to society. What
was needed was the capacity and vision of political and
religious leaders to react to it in a balanced manner. It
was essential to detect early signs of developments that
might lead to religious persecution or intolerant
behaviour. Extreme measures gave rise only to further
extremism. If mutual tolerance, understanding and
genuine interest could be established at the grass-roots
level, many incidents of intolerance and discrimination
based on religion or belief might ultimately be
prevented.
42. Ms. Martins (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, asked what measures would be
most urgent in overcoming obstacles to protection of
religious freedom raised by blasphemy laws. She
would also like to know how specific regulations could
prove to be counterproductive, and how to prevent a
hierarchy of beliefs most effectively.
43. Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) welcomed the
Special Rapporteur’s balanced and objective approach
to her mandate, as reflected in the report (A/62/280).
Her delegation agreed that criminal acts committed in
the name of religious beliefs should not go unpunished,
but that Governments should respond only in
accordance with the rule of law and international
human rights norms. She asked the Special Rapporteur
to define the role of Governments in ensuring freedom
of religion while at the same time combating
intolerance and discrimination. The Special Rapporteur
should also explain how she managed to balance the
promotion of freedom of opinion with the protection of
the religious sentiments and beliefs both of individuals
and groups. The responsibility of non-State actors for
violations of human rights should also be examined.
44. Ms. Nelson (Canada) said that her delegation
encouraged the Special Rapporteur to continue her
country visits, which constituted a fundamental pillar
of the mandate. She enquired about any requests for
visits to countries of concern which had not yet
received a response. Canada was also deeply concerned
at ongoing discriminatory practices which targeted
religious minorities as well as incitement to violence in
the name of religion, and asked whether the Special
Rapporteur could elaborate on preventive measures
that Governments could take to avoid the problem.
Finally, it would be interesting to hear how the Special
Rapporteur saw the linkages between her mandate and
other human rights mandates and how she cooperated
with other mandate holders.
45. Mr. Casal (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
drew attention to the issue of non-State actors in the
form of religious groups who sought to change
religious beliefs among indigenous communities and
saw indigenous belief systems as inferior. He would
therefore be interested in hearing the Special
Rapporteur’s understanding of the concept of
defamation of religion, which his delegation saw as a
legal concept.
46. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that the
responsibility to protect the right to religious freedom
fell to all Governments, but should never be arbitrarily
abridged by any Government. Because of the
importance it accorded to that right, the United States
appreciated the dedicated work of the Special
Rapporteur. Her report accurately identified the issues
that limited religious freedom, and provided a
workable set of recommendations for overcoming
religious intolerance. His delegation would be
interested to know whether the Special Rapporteur had
approached any Governments regarding the
implementation of those recommendations.A/C.3/62/SR.26
07-56529 8
47. Given the pressing need to promote religious
freedom, the United States strongly supported the
extension of the Special Rapporteur’s mandate, which
must be free of amendments that would limit or
weaken the ability to work effectively. The
continuation of her vigorous engagement with
Governments was critical, as those contacts were
important tools for investigating allegations of abuse
and for allowing Governments to respond and take
corrective measures. However, it opposed efforts to
alter the mandate in ways that would permanently add
additional elements. Those efforts had focused
primarily on issues of defamation of religion. While it
discouraged actions that were offensive to particular
religious traditions, his delegation also believed that
basic freedoms required that all persons should be able
to critique religious practice without fear of reprisal.
48. Ms. Sutikno (Indonesia) said that her country
was proud of its diversity and remained committed to
freedom of religion. The case mentioned in the report
of the Special Rapporteur (A/62/280) was therefore an
isolated case and should not be regarded as deliberate
disrespect for human rights. She asked why the Special
Rapporteur had difficulty in accepting the concept of
defamation of religion, since there had been many
deadly consequences of incitement to hatred towards
religions.
49. Mr. Ermita (Philippines) said he was particularly
impressed by the Special Rapporteur’s plea for inter-
faith dialogue and invited her to focus further on
multilateral approaches to safeguard freedom of
religion or belief.
50. Mr. Meyer (Observer for the Holy See) said that
his delegation supported the Special Rapporteur’s
recommendation to devise proactive strategies to
prevent acts of intolerance based on religion or belief
and asked whether she could outline some best
practices and creative initiatives that could serve as
models in that respect.
51. Mr. Pham Hai Anh (Viet Nam) said he wished to
make a clarification concerning footnote 22 in the
report of the Special Rapporteur. That footnote referred
to a “summary of the exchange of letters” contained in
two reports that had been submitted to the Commission
on Human Rights. In juxtaposition to the other
footnotes, which referred to replies from Governments,
the footnote was somewhat ambiguous and gave the
erroneous impression that the Government of Viet Nam
had not replied to the Special Rapporteur. His
Government had, in fact, replied in the two
aforementioned reports.
52. Mr. Tun (Myanmar) said that his delegation
firmly rejected paragraph 45 of the Special
Rapporteur’s report stating that a number of citizens in
western Myanmar had been subjected to extrajudicial
execution and torture and that many had fled to
Bangladesh. He considered those charges inane and
inept, tantamount to driving a wedge between
Myanmar and Bangladesh, two friendly neighbours
that had resolved in an exemplary way the problem of
illegal immigration.
53. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that religious defamation
on the pretext of freedom of opinion or expression was
in fact a violation of the rights of others. It was
therefore important to focus on promoting respect and
mutual understanding among religions and cultures.
54. Mr. Chihuailaf (Chile) said that the right not to
profess any religion or belief should be protected. He
would appreciate the Special Rapporteur expanding on
her statement that proactive strategies that should be
devised to prevent acts of intolerance and
discrimination. He would also welcome further details
concerning her comment that specific legislation
should be introduced in a cautious manner because
compulsory overregulation might prove to be
counterproductive.
55. Mr. Sergiwa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that
Muslims in some countries were subjected to
discrimination on the false premise that Islam and
terrorism were linked. He hoped that the Special
Rapporteur would pursue her efforts to consolidate
tolerance and present specific recommendations to
safeguard religious freedom.
56. Ms. Jahinger (Special Rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief) said that any religious hatred that
served as an incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence fell under article 20, paragraph 2 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
thus constituting a human rights violation.
Nonetheless, she wished to make a distinction between
that violation and the concept of defamation. In the
report she had submitted, together with the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, to
the Human Rights Council in September 2006
(A/HRC/2/3), she had pointed out that defamation wasA/C.3/62/SR.26
9 07-56529
a legal term and could range from merely denouncing
someone’s religious belief, even in an academic
manner, to committing a human rights violation. If
defamation was considered a human rights violation,
any person claiming superiority of his or her religion
or anyone analysing religion intellectually could be
accused of defamation, which would be tantamount to
religious persecution. It was possible to criticize
religion in an objective matter, while belief in racial
superiority was a subjective judgement. A distinction
had to be made between those two types of
discrimination.
57. Although defamation of religions might offend
people, it did not directly result in a violation of their
human rights. Laws on blasphemy had been vastly
misused and had targeted the most vulnerable, even
those who were dispassionate about religion. Making
every criticism of religion a human rights violation and
subject to legislation would be counterproductive
because people might be induced to violate the law and
challenge the Government. In India, for instance, many
lower-caste people had disobeyed the anti-conversion
laws, and it had been impossible to punish everyone.
58. With regard to the conversion of indigenous
people, she said that could be a matter of misuse of
power rather than defamation. She would be looking
into that issue more closely in the future. In that
connection, she stressed that Governments should be
considering long-term developments, and deciding how
they would accommodate their policies with the
proliferation of new religions.
59. Turning to the proselytization of religion during
humanitarian crises, when people were most
vulnerable, she said it was important not merely to
adopt regulations but to search for solutions by means
of a wider dialogue. She had seen many examples of
good practices, where possible conflicts had been
averted through consultations, as in the cases of
Nigeria and Sri Lanka. There had been good practices
in terms of education as well, specifically the work of
the “Education for all” movement conducted by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), which taught children
pluralism and tolerance.
60. Mr. Bustamante (Special Rapporteur on the
human rights of migrants) said that he had often
reiterated the positive effects of migration for both host
countries and countries of origin. However, the focus
of States had largely been on the better management
and control of the movement of migrants and their
goods and services rather than on the articulation and
protection of their rights. He therefore urged States to
incorporate a human rights perspective into their
discussions, whether they represented countries of
origin, transit or destination. The next Global Forum
on Migration and Development, to be held in Manila in
2008, would be an excellent opportunity to promote
that perspective.
61. Although there was constructive discussion at the
international level, migrants at the national level were
increasingly portrayed as “black sheep” and subjected
to increased administrative procedures. In addition to
the fears that the way of life in the host country would
be undermined, migration was often associated with
traffickers and people smugglers. Rather than focusing
on the negative perceptions of migrants, there should
be a debate at the national level on the advisability and
relevance of adopting the International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families.
62. Although it was the sovereign right of all States
to safeguard their borders and regulate their migration
policies, they should ensure respect for the human
rights of migrants while enacting and implementing
immigration laws. Today, the migrant population,
which came from diverse countries, was particularly
vulnerable to social exclusion and xenophobia. There
had been an increase in incidents of discriminatory
behaviour towards migrants in countries of both
destination and transit.
63. The legal administration of migrants was not
subject to control, and disproportionate powers were
exercised by the immigration authorities. States also
resorted to police “raids” in private homes, arresting all
residents who did not hold documents attesting to legal
residence. In the context of irregular migration, the
Special Rapporteur was also concerned at the alarming
numbers of women and unaccompanied minors who
fell prey to trafficking and smuggling networks. The
need for migrants to work made them easy prey for the
trafficking networks, especially when those networks
enjoyed a degree of impunity. Undocumented migrants
were at increased risk of having their rights abused;
they should be treated with dignity and provided with
legal and humanitarian assistance, including urgent
medical care. Many migrants paid considerable
amounts of money to cross borders and ended up in aA/C.3/62/SR.26
07-56529 10
type of debt bondage. Ironically, irregular migration
was often the direct result of restrictive migration
policies.
64. The Special Rapporteur called on the
international community to support countries of origin
to generate conditions that allowed their nationals to
stay in their own communities. For their part, sending
countries should create human rights conditions at the
national level to convince potential migrants to stay in
their country and should inform them about the risks of
falling into the hands of international smuggling and
trafficking networks if they left home.
65. Ms. Castelo (Portugal), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, welcomed the Special Rapporteur’s
efforts to raise the visibility of the human rights of
migrants. The European Union noted that the terms of
reference of the Special Rapporteur’s mandate
remained unchanged despite the review of working
methods contained in document E/CN.4/2006/73. The
Special Rapporteur should comment on his priorities
for future action, inter alia in the context of reform and
on how the protection of the human rights of migrants
might be advanced by the Human Rights Council and
United Nations system as a whole. He should also
outline how he intended to enhance cooperation with
relevant stakeholders at all levels, including in the
interests of women migrants.
66. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that the
United States wished to reaffirm its commitment to
protecting the human rights of migrants, who had
played an important role in building the nation. The
previous year, 1.2 million people had become legal
permanent residents in the United States, with family
reunification accounting for 63 per cent of cases.
67. The Government supported legal, safe and
orderly migration and made concerted efforts to warn
of the risks of illegal migration and to assist those who
found themselves in peril. An elite Border Patrol
Search, Trauma and Rescue (BORSTAR) unit had been
deployed for that purpose near the border with Mexico.
68. Acts of intolerance, racial discrimination and
xenophobia and related crimes against migrants were
prohibited under domestic law. The United States had a
robust asylum process for people who had a well-
founded fear of persecution in their home country. The
previous year, over 41,000 refugees from nearly
60 countries had been granted asylum in the United
States. They benefited from a range of specially
tailored programmes and social services. Proud of its
strong immigration tradition, the United States
believed that coordination, cooperation and respect for
all human beings were the keys to managing migration
effectively.
69. Mr. Ermita (Philippines) asked what could be
done to ensure that efforts to prevent trafficking in
human beings did not impede the realization of the
human rights of migrants.
70. Ms. Sutikno (Indonesia) said that Indonesia was
engaged in constructive dialogue with the Special
Rapporteur and was in the process of implementing the
valuable recommendations he had made in the light of
his visit the previous year. She asked how he planned
to tackle persistent discrimination and violence against
migrants in countries of destination and transit, and
what role regional mechanisms should play in that
connection.
71. Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka) said that the
human rights of migrants received insufficient
attention at the international level, despite the
contribution they made to the economies of destination
countries. At the Global Forum on Migration and
Development, held in Brussels, there had been no focus
on the human rights of migrants. Moreover, virtually
all the countries that had ratified the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families were
countries of origin. The Special Rapporteur should
explain how he proposed to encourage wider
ratification of the Convention and promote a rules- and
rights-based approach to the issue that was not
confined to human rights forums. It was a matter of
serious concern to countries of origin that goods and
services crossed borders freely, while people were
treated worse than commodities.
72. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico) said he agreed that a rights-
based approach to the issue of migration was essential
and wondered how the agenda of the next Global
Forum might be improved. Resources should be
allocated not for the building of walls, but for
development. Bridges for mutual understanding and
cooperation were also vital.
73. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) joined with previous speakers
in commending the Special Rapporteur on his work.
There was a need for a comprehensive approach to the
realization of migrants’ human rights. His delegation
wondered how more Member States might beA/C.3/62/SR.26
11 07-56529
convinced to ratify the Convention and how the Special
Rapporteur envisaged cooperation with States that
were not parties to the Convention.
74. Mr. Akindele (Nigeria) said that his delegation
agreed with all the Special Rapporteur’s
recommendations. Migrants must be treated with
dignity and full respect for their human rights.
Memorandums of understanding were required
between sending and receiving countries, and more
funding should be allocated to United Nations efforts
to tackle the crime of human trafficking.
75. Mr. Ke Yousheng (China) said that migration
should not be viewed as a “problem” since it had
contributed to the social and economic development of
destination countries. Sending countries should be
encouraged to create more development opportunities
at home, while destination countries should do more to
improve the situation of migrants and combat racial
discrimination and xenophobia. He asked the Special
Rapporteur to explain how he intended to cooperate
with other special procedures for the promotion and
protection of the rights of migrants.
76. Ms. González (Cuba) said that Cuba supported
regulated, orderly migration and welcomed the
opportunity to discuss the matter with other Member
States. She praised the Special Rapporteur’s efforts on
behalf of migrants, concurring with his assessment of
the situation. She would be interested to read any
recommendations he had made following other country
visits.
77. Mr. Sergiwa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that
the forced return of migrants constituted a gross
violation of human rights. His Government took a keen
interest in the issue of migration and had hosted a
regional conference to study its many aspects. The
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya was committed to the humane
treatment of migrants in accordance with its
obligations under the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families and other relevant
international agreements. Lastly, his delegation
welcomed the recommendations contained in the report
and agreed that there was a need for more resources to
promote the human rights of migrants in receiving
countries.
78. Mr. Bustamante (Special Rapporteur on the
human rights of migrants), welcoming the interest
expressed by delegations, said that he would make a
general statement in response to the questions posed.
Regrettably, the world was divided into States that had
ratified the Convention and those that had not. That
phenomenon was no “act of nature”, but an “act of
power” that the Organization must address. He agreed
that the next Global Forum should stress the human
rights dimension of migration. There existed a false
perception in many countries that undocumented
migrants had no rights, which States had an obligation
to dispel.
79. Many countries with a de facto demand for
migrant labour, both documented and irregular, had
remained silent about the scale of that demand,
sometimes refusing even to recognize it. He thus
planned to focus on building a consensus around the
need for a new standard requiring States to measure
that demand objectively. Such information would help
combat racist and discriminatory acts against migrants
and provide a weapon against xenophobia. It would be
in the interests of all parties, except those seeking to
exploit migrant labour to maximize profit.
80. The exploitation of children for the sex market
was a particularly gross violation of human rights.
Such a market was no abstraction; it also had both
supply and demand. The Organization must act to
ensure that that demand was recognized, or it would be
very difficult to realize the human rights of migrants.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.