United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.43
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
18 December 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-59761 (E)
*0759761*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 43rd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 14 November 2007, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 62: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.43
07-59761 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.67,
L.82)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.67: Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
1. Ms. Kiertzner (Denmark) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of the Nordic countries (Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway) and a large
number of sponsors. The text reaffirmed the support of
the General Assembly for the work of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
reflected recent developments, including in the area of
international protection.
2. Australia, the Central African Republic, Cyprus,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Iraq, Montenegro, Morocco, Panama,
Romania, Sierra Leone, The former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and Uruguay had joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution.
3. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Belarus, Belize, Botswana, Colombia, Guatemala,
Guinea, Lesotho, Liberia, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Moldova, Paraguay, the Sudan, Thailand,
Togo, Turkey and Turkmenistan had also joined the
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.82: Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa
4. Ms. Sulimani (Sierra Leone), speaking on behalf
of the African Group, proposed that action on the draft
resolution should be postponed, as negotiations were
still under way.
5. It was so decided.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.29, L.35, L.38,
L.68-L.81)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.35: Combating defamation
of religions
6. Mr. Amil (Pakistan), speaking on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, introduced the
draft resolution, which was based on relevant
resolutions of the former Commission on Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council. It also built on
General Assembly resolution 61/164. Over history,
different religions and their adherents had been targets
of discrimination, violence and defamation. Today, it
was Islam and its adherents that were targeted.
Islamophobia had been extensively documented by the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance as well as by other special mandate holders.
Since 11 September 2001, the world had seen an
increase in discrimination against Muslims, with the
acts of a few persons professing to be Muslims causing
more than 1 billion people to be tarred with the brush
of terrorism. The objective of the draft resolution was
to reverse that phenomenon and to protect other
religions and beliefs from similar discrimination and
defamation, which had devastating consequences both
for the lives of individuals and for harmonious
relations between communities and States.
7. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) noted
that Belarus had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.38: Status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia
8. Mr. Alasania (Georgia), introducing the draft
resolution, said that people who had fled Abkhazia in
the wake of the atrocities had, for more than 14 years,
been denied their right to live in dignity, to return
home and to own land and property. The time had come
for the General Assembly to make an unequivocal
statement on the issue in order to restore faith in the
United Nations-led settlement process. The draft
resolution would promote, not impede, that process.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29: Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty
9. The Chairman drew attention to the proposed
amendments to the draft resolution contained in
documents A/C.3/62/L.68 to L.81.
10. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) introduced the amendments
contained in documents A/C.3/62/L.68 and L.69, which
would ensure respect for the sovereign right of StatesA/C.3/62/SR.43
3 07-59761
to determine their own penalties in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and article 6 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
11. Bangladesh, Indonesia, Nauru, Tonga and Yemen
had joined the sponsors of L.68, while Nauru, Tonga
and Saudi Arabia had joined the sponsors of L.69.
12. Mr. Menon (Singapore) introduced a further
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.70. It
was designed to redress the balance lacking in
document A/C.3/62/L.29.
13. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) noted
that Bangladesh, Nauru, Tonga and Mauritania had
joined the sponsors of the amendment.
14. Mr. Degia (Barbados) introduced the amendment
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.71, which sought to
address one of the major shortcomings of draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29, namely the incorrect
assumption that the death penalty was prohibited in
international law. It was only appropriate that some
language from the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights should be included.
15. Bangladesh, Nauru, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Tonga had joined the sponsors.
16. Mr. Degia (Barbados), introducing the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.72, said
that the amendment sought to lend balance to the one-
sided text contained in document A/C.3/62/L.29. The
sponsors of the draft resolution, citing the Second
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, had conveyed the
impression that all countries had an obligation to
abolish the death penalty. Only States parties to the
Protocol had an obligation to adhere to it.
17. Mr. Menon (Singapore) introduced the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.73,
which sought to correct the false impression that the
work of the Commission on Human Rights had been
unanimously supported and welcomed. As noted in the
amendment, many States had disassociated themselves
from past resolutions on the death penalty during the
Commission’s sessions.
18. Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda), introducing
the amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.74,
said that the Islamic Republic of Iran, Nauru, Tonga
and the United Arab Emirates had joined the sponsors.
19. All States must consider their specific legal,
social, economic and cultural conditions when
reflecting on the application of a particular rule or
standard. The sponsors respected the right of some
countries to abolish the death penalty, and those
countries should respect the right of others to uphold or
abolish it based on each country’s national imperatives
and after broad-based internal consideration of the
issue. She hoped that the amendment would be adopted
without a vote.
20. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana), introducing the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.75, said
that Bangladesh, Trinidad and Tobago and the United
Arab Emirates had joined the sponsors.
21. The proposed amendment was a statement of fact,
as more than 100 Member States retained capital
punishment in their national laws while only 90
Member States had abolished it. The amendment was
not meant to present arguments for or against the
establishment of a moratorium on the death penalty,
but simply to put the issues raised in draft resolution
L.29 in their proper context. It was regrettable that the
main sponsors of draft resolution L.29 refused to allow
an accurate reflection of the global situation as it
pertained to the issue of the death penalty, believing
that the only way to win the support of a majority of
countries was to present overly inflated statistics
skewed in their favour. Member States had different
historical and political backgrounds that influenced the
evolution of their respective constitutional
jurisprudence. For that reason, the sponsors of the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.75
respected those countries that had abolished the death
penalty or placed a moratorium on its use. The
amendment in question was meant to obtain
recognition of countries that chose to retain the death
penalty.
22. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana), introducing the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.76, said
that Trinidad and Tobago had joined the sponsors.
23. Capital punishment was permitted under
international law provided that due process and proper
judicial safeguards were observed. Therefore, it was
not correct to say that the death penalty undermined
human dignity and that a moratorium on the use of the
death penalty contributed to the progressive
development of human rights. The purpose of that
statement, and of the entire resolution, was to passA/C.3/62/SR.43
07-59761 4
judgement on the manner in which sovereign countries
ran their own Governments and to impose the positions
adopted in some regions on everyone else. A properly
balanced statement was needed, reflecting the different
political, economic, social and cultural situations of the
world, and the amendment sought to reflect that
diversity.
24. Ms. Booker (Bahamas), introducing the
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.77, said
that the Islamic Republic of Iran, Nauru and Tonga had
joined the sponsors. A wide array of views on the issue
of the death penalty had been heard, fuelled by media
campaigns, public opinion and to some extent, political
pressures. The sponsors of the amendment contained in
document L.77 could not support a decision on an issue
that did not enjoy international consensus. The
proposed amendment was intended to strike a balance
in the text of draft resolution L.29.
25. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Zimbabwe had also joined the sponsors of the
proposed amendment.
26. Mr. Degia (Barbados) introduced the amendment
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.78 to 81.
Introducing the amendment contained in document
A/C.3/62/L.78, he said that the language used in
operative paragraphs 2 and 2 (a) of draft resolution
L.29 was unnecessarily strong and judgemental,
implying that countries that retained the death penalty
on their statutes did not respect standards and
guidelines with regard to the use of the death penalty.
A more enlightened approach would be to utilize
conciliatory language.
27. Introducing the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/62/L.79, he said the reasons for asking
some Member States to provide information relating to
the use of capital punishment and the eventual use to
which such information would be put were unclear. In
keeping with the notions of democracy, transparency
and accountability that the United Nations represented,
any such information should be made available to the
public, whose interest Governments were supposed to
serve and protect.
28. Introducing the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/62/L.80, he said that paragraph 2 (c)
was overly prescriptive and not in line with the type of
language contained in the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. Such a departure from an
important international instrument would raise
problems for States parties to that instrument.
29. Introducing the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/62/L.81, he said that Nauru and Tonga
had joined the sponsors. The amendment would replace
paragraph 2 (d) of draft resolution L.29, which was
unacceptable because it sought to impose a set of views
on certain Member States. The proposed amendment
was a much better attestation of what had been agreed
to in a key instrument, the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights.
30. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Zimbabwe had also joined the sponsors of the
proposed amendment.
Agenda item 62: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued) (A/C.3/62/L.5/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.5/Rev.1: Implementation of
the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons: realizing the Millennium Development Goals
for persons with disabilities
31. The Chairman said that draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.5/Rev.1 contained no programme budget
implications.
32. Mr. Hermoso (Philippines), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.5/Rev.1, said that Belgium,
China, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Greece,
Luxembourg, Mauritius, the Netherlands, Peru, South
Africa, the Sudan, Sweden and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela had joined the sponsors. The text focused
on the needs of persons with disabilities and aimed to
ensure that such persons were included in the global
pursuit to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
The resolution called for the mainstreaming of the
perspective of persons with disabilities in development
processes, and it used the World Programme of Action
concerning disabled persons as a guide to analyse and
address effectively the situation of disabled persons. It
also called upon the United Nations Secretariat to give
higher priority to the concerns and issues of persons
with disabilities and to include them in the work
programme of the United Nations system. He noted
that the word “education” should be added after the
phrase “in particular free and compulsory primary” inA/C.3/62/SR.43
5 07-59761
the third line of paragraph 6 (c). He recommended that
the draft resolution, as a consensus text, should be
adopted unanimously.
33. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Algeria, Angola, Austria, Benin, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, the Central African
Republic, Chile, Comoros, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Ethiopia, France, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal,
Nigeria, Qatar, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Uganda and Ukraine
had also joined the sponsors.
34. Ms. Yarlett (Australia) said that her delegation
considered that protecting and promoting the rights of
disabled persons was an important task of the United
Nations. Australia had signed the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities on the day that it
had opened for signature. It was currently engaged in
the thorough process of consultation in the legislature
that would lead to ratification.
35. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.5/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
Agenda item 70: Human rights questions (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.29 and L.68 to
L.81)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29: Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty
36. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
37. Ms. Banzon-Abalos (Philippines) said that the
text of the draft resolution was the result of a
comprehensive consultation process, which had been
conducted in a transparent and cooperative manner. It
had provided ample opportunity for the expression of
views and concerns, while preserving the spirit of the
initiative.
38. Throughout the process, the sponsors had made it
clear that the focus of the draft resolution was a
moratorium on the use of the death penalty. Abolition
should be regarded as an eventual result of a step-by-
step process. The text also began with an overarching
reference to the Charter of the United Nations, which
should be read and understood in its entirety; selective
quotations would only weaken its significance as a
whole. In the same spirit, general and non-selective
references to the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and other relevant international
instruments had been included.
39. The aim of the draft resolution was not to
interfere or impose views on others, nor did it aim to
challenge national sovereignty, but to reinforce and
encourage the growing trend towards a phasing-out of
the death penalty.
40. In closing, she noted that Algeria, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Mauritius and Sao Tome and
Principe had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
41. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) drew attention to editorial
corrections in the Arabic version of the draft
resolution.
42. Mr. Amil (Pakistan), speaking on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), said
that it strongly believed that every human being had
the inherent right to life. The sanctity of life was
revered in Islam and in all other religions. It was the
duty of States to protect that right by law, in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and other relevant international instruments.
The OIC acknowledged the decision of some States to
exercise their sovereign right to apply a moratorium on
the death penalty followed by its abolition. He
reiterated that the death penalty was an issue for the
criminal justice system. It was the responsibility of all
States who retained the death penalty to see that it was
applied pursuant to the judgement of a competent court
according to due process of law and the application of
all legal remedies.
43. The OIC recognized the lack of international
consensus on the issue of the moratorium. The
diverging legal and human rights arguments could be
reconciled only through comprehensive negotiation and
debate at the multilateral level.A/C.3/62/SR.43
07-59761 6
44. Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda), speaking also
on behalf of the Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica,
Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis,
St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname
and Trinidad and Tobago, said that Caribbean Member
States were committed to the promotion and protection
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and to
their international human rights obligations, having
acceded to or ratified most of the major international
human rights instruments. They had long been among
the voices calling for support to efforts to reaffirm the
universality, objectivity and non-selectivity of the
consideration of all human rights, recognizing that the
right to development underpinned the realization of all
human rights. While they insisted on respect for their
national constitutions and judicial systems, they
continued their efforts to reconcile national legislative
frameworks with the international legal instruments to
which they were parties. They availed themselves of
technical assistance to complete the related reporting
requirements, but would focus scarce financial
resources on their own human development agenda.
45. Caribbean Member States which maintained the
death penalty had great difficulty with the tone and
intent of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29. Article 6,
paragraph 2, of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights addressed the situation of countries
which had not abolished the death penalty, and
permitted a sentence of death under very specific
conditions. The countries she represented regretted any
implication that they arbitrarily applied capital
punishment for insignificant crimes and without regard
for the human rights of the prosecuted. The death
penalty was imposed only for cases of murder or
treason, and in fact had not been carried out in those
States for more than a decade. They equally regretted
the unwillingness of many abolitionist countries to
engage in productive discussion that could better
address the very complex issue of crime prevention and
root causes and how criminal activity undermined the
fundamental human rights of citizens. There appeared
to be scant interest in collaborating with Caribbean
Member States to address not just the symptoms of
criminal activity but their socio-economic stimuli.
46. The delegations she represented respected the
right of countries to abolish the death penalty, but in
turn, the sovereign decision to uphold or abolish the
death penalty based on national imperatives should
also be respected.
47. Notwithstanding their objections, those
delegations remained ready to have a meaningful
discussion on human rights in its wider context.
48. Ms. Bowen (Jamaica) said that for her
delegation, the question of the death penalty fell within
the domestic jurisdiction of each State, and it therefore
challenged the basic premise of a draft resolution
seeking to impose one perspective on the domestic
jurisdictions of other States. Jamaica found the
suggestion that the death penalty was contrary to
international law entirely unconvincing. For instance,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, sometimes
used by the European Union to support its perspective,
affirmed the right to life, a position also embraced by
Jamaica, but did not in any part suggest that the death
penalty was inconsistent with the right to life. The
sponsors of the draft resolution were seeking to read
words against the death penalty into the Universal
Declaration, whereas at the time of its adoption, in
1948, the vast majority of countries in the world,
including some sponsors of the current draft resolution,
still retained the death penalty. It was not sufficient to
say that conditions had changed or that the Declaration
was a living document.
49. The International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights also affirmed the right to life, but very carefully
avoided the suggestion that the death penalty was
contrary to international law. The basic premise of its
article 6, paragraph 2, was that the death penalty was
compatible with international law provided it was
carried out in keeping with certain conditions. The
Second Optional Protocol to the Covenant, expressly
aimed at the abolition of the death penalty, had been
ratified by roughly 50 countries, or 25 per cent of the
membership of the Organization. She did not
understand why the General Assembly was promoting
the idea that the wishes of that 25 per cent should
prevail over the wishes of the remaining 75 per cent.
With at least one half of the countries of the world
retaining the death penalty, it was difficult to see how a
general rule of customary international law against the
death penalty could have been developed.
50. There were several moral and political arguments
pertaining to human dignity, deterrence and the
possibility of error which ensured that countries would
not impose the death penalty in an arbitrary manner.
Her Government had indicated that it was giving
consideration to a vote in Parliament on whether that
form of punishment should be continued. It was alsoA/C.3/62/SR.43
7 07-59761
important to note that Jamaica had not implemented the
death penalty since 1988.
51. Jamaica did not accept the right of other countries
to impose their moral and political perspectives on it,
just as it did not seek to impose its judgements on
others when the matter clearly fell within the reserved
domain of the State. It would therefore vote against the
draft resolution contained in A/C.3/62/L.29. It
supported various amendments to the draft resolution
designed to show greater respect for individual State
perspectives and self-determination.
52. Ms. Booker (Bahamas) said that her Government
viewed the death penalty as a matter of national
sovereignty and as being under domestic jurisdiction. It
prided itself on its adherence to the principles of
human rights and fundamental freedoms without
distinction, as guaranteed in its Constitution and in
accordance with international law. It was with deep
regret, however, that the Bahamas would vote against
the draft resolution as originally presented; it would
support the proposed amendments.
53. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that respect of human
dignity and the sanctity of life were highly revered in
Islam and other religions, and the death penalty was
restricted to the most serious crimes in Islamic
jurisprudence. It could be imposed only within the due
process of law.
54. Article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights underscored that every human
being had the “inherent right to life”. However, it did
not expressly prohibit capital punishment, stating that
it could be imposed only for the most serious crimes, in
accordance with the law in force at the time of the
commission of the crime. The restriction on carrying
out the sentence on pregnant women demonstrated
respect for the “right to life” of the unborn child. The
Islamic sharia also prohibited abortion except in rare
circumstances, and it was for that reason Egypt had
joined other delegations in presenting amendments
(A/C.3/62/L.68-81) to the draft resolution under
discussion.
55. Arguments put forward by a number of sponsors
of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 to the effect that
General Assembly resolutions were only
recommendations did not hold; General Assembly
resolutions constituted international norms that, in
time, became an integral part of international law.
Adopting a resolution that dealt with such a
controversial issue, by only a small minority, would
erode the credibility of the General Assembly’s role
and cast further doubt on the legitimacy of the United
Nations as a whole.
56. Draft resolution L.29 failed to take into account
the great diversity of legal, social and economic
settings in the world. The issue should have been
addressed by the Human Rights Council in a
comprehensive manner, examining the “right to life”
from all aspects.
57. Some Member States had voluntarily decided to
abolish the death penalty or introduce a moratorium,
whereas others had retained it in their legislation. Both
sides had chosen the path corresponding to their social,
cultural and legal needs, in accordance with the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Neither side was right or wrong, and neither side had
the right to impose its standpoint on the other. The
amendments submitted to the draft resolution were
merely attempts to strike a balance and maintain
respect for both standpoints.
58. Ms. Zhang (China) said that there was no
international consensus on the abolition of the death
penalty and that the General Assembly had already
discussed it to no avail in 1994 and 1999. It was a
highly complex criminal justice issue and a matter for
sovereign States to decide within the purview of their
national legislation. The International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights stipulated that the death
penalty could be imposed for the most serious crimes,
but did not ban it.
59. The General Assembly was not the proper forum
to discuss such a divisive issue and could only serve to
politicize it further. The sponsors of the draft resolution
were trying to impose their views on others and not
acting in a spirit of constructive dialogue.
60. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran)
said that more than 100 countries recognized that
capital punishment was a deterrent and included it in
their penal codes, believing that the right to life of
victims was more important than that of a mass-
murderer. States which had given up the death penalty,
or introduced a moratorium, had no right to impose
their views on others, especially since article 6 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
did not make abolition of capital punishment an
obligation. He requested the sponsors of draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 to withdraw it.A/C.3/62/SR.43
07-59761 8
61. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that draft
resolution L.29 constituted blatant interference by a
group of States into the internal affairs of Member
States, whose sovereignty was guaranteed under the
Charter of the United Nations. Asking Member States
to introduce a moratorium on the death penalty was
tantamount to requesting them to change their judicial
systems. Her Government applied capital punishment
only for the most serious crimes, in accordance with
article 6 of the Covenant. Those countries seeking to
impose a moratorium on the death penalty put the
rights of the accused before those of the victims, and
her Government did not agree with that approach. Her
delegation would vote against draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29, and she called on all Member States to
support the proposed amendments to that draft
resolution.
62. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana) said that the first
amendment to the draft resolution, which was
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.68, referred directly
to Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter of the United
Nations, which clearly emphasized the principle of
non-interference into the domestic jurisdiction of
Member States. He hoped that the reference to the
Charter would serve to protect small countries, such as
his own, against undue interference from those which
assumed that their political, cultural and legal systems
were superior. Over time, the Charter had proven to be
the only instrument to protect Member States,
particularly developing countries.
63. The issue at stake was not the abolition of the
death penalty or the imposition of a moratorium, but
rather the need to frame the debate in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. Failing to assert that
principle would imply to the main sponsors of the draft
resolution that they could disregard the provisions of
the Charter, and were free to do what they wanted in
the future. His country would vote in favour of the
amendment.
64. Mr. Menon (Singapore) said that a group of
countries, led by the European Union, had decided to
introduce a draft resolution in an attempt to impose its
views, knowing full well that the draft resolution in
question would polarize the Third Committee. The
amendments submitted (A/C.3/62/L.68-81) were
attempts to inject a balance into what was clearly a
one-sided view. The ultimate objective of draft
resolution L.29 was not to impose a moratorium on the
use of the death penalty, but to abolish it altogether, as
evidenced by paragraph 2 (c).
65. Many countries considered the death penalty to
be a matter of criminal justice rather than a human
rights issue, and imposed it only for the most serious
crimes. Despite what many sponsors to the draft
resolution claimed, the death penalty could not be
considered a human rights violation because it was not
banned under the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. At the time of its adoption, some 15 European
countries still retained the death penalty on their statute
books and obviously did not consider it to be a human
rights issue. Even the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, in article 6, stated that the death
penalty could be imposed for the most serious crimes.
The countries of the European Union had changed their
minds in the intervening years, on the grounds that
they wanted to reflect current or shifting values, and
wanted everyone to think as they did.
66. His delegation supported the amendment
(A/C.3/62/L.68) introduced by Egypt, believing that it
was relevant to refer to the Charter of the United
Nations, which defended the sovereignty of the
domestic jurisdiction of Member States.
67. Mr. Makanga (Gabon) said he wished to clarify
that the draft resolution on the use of the death penalty
was an interregional initiative and not the initiative of
the European Union. His country was a sponsor of the
draft resolution, and it was not a member of the
European Union.
68. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that some States had
abolished the death penalty or imposed a moratorium,
whereas others maintained it. Both sides had chosen
freely, acting in compliance with article 6 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
and neither had the right to impose their rights on the
other. The amendment (A/C.3/62/L.68) was intended to
improve the language of the draft resolution, allowing
each Member State to decide on matters within its
domestic jurisdiction, in accordance with Article 7 of
the Charter of the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.