United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.41
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
6 February 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-57888 (E)
*1157888*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 41st meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 3 November 2011, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Promotion and protection of human rights: Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Promotion and protection of human rights: Human rights situations and reports
of special rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)A/C.3/66/SR.41
11-57888 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.63)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.63: Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
1. Mr. Rasmussen (Denmark), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.63, said that for the past 10
years the Nordic countries had coordinated the draft
resolution and had focused on essential policy
elements, using agreed text and limiting changes to the
addition of certain issues that deserved special
attention.
2. The draft resolution highlighted the commemoration
of the sixtieth anniversary of the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees and the fiftieth
anniversary of the 1961 Convention on the Reduction
of Statelessness. In addition, some new text drew
attention to the series of regional dialogues with
refugee women and girls undertaken by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to highlight
the importance of pursuing work on their protection,
and also commended the High Commissioner and the
States for launching the Global Resettlement Solidarity
Initiative during the crisis in Libya in April.
3. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Austria, Belarus, Burkina Faso, Burundi, the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Israel, Kyrgyzstan,
Monaco, Portugal, Romania, Thailand and the United
Republic of Tanzania had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Promotion and protection of human rights:
Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.32, L.33, L.34,
L.35, L.36, L.40 and L.42)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.32: Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights
4. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking as
coordinator of the working group on human rights of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that the
draft resolution was presented on an annual basis and
its purpose was to recognize that the strengthening of
international cooperation in the sphere of human rights
was essential to achieve fully the objectives of the
United Nations, including the promotion and protection
of all the human rights.
5. The modifications introduced addressed technical
innovations above all, but a special reference had been
made to the recently adopted political declaration to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.33: Promotion of equitable
geographical distribution in the membership of the
human rights treaty bodies
6. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking as
coordinator of the working group on human rights of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that the
draft resolution affirmed the importance of continuing
efforts to reduce the imbalance in the actual
composition of the members of several treaty bodies,
which tended to be detrimental to the election of
experts from some regional groups. The current draft
resolution requested the Secretary-General to submit a
comprehensive report on its implementation.
7. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the United Republic of Tanzania had joined the
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.34: Human rights and
cultural diversity
8. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking as
coordinator of the working group on human rights of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that the
purpose of the draft resolution was to recognize that all
cultures and civilizations contributed to the mutual
enrichment of the cultural life of mankind and to
acknowledge the importance of respect and
understanding for religious and cultural diversity.
9. The text had been updated slightly, stressing the
important contribution of culture to development and
the achievement of national development objectives
and internationally-agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals.
10. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the United Republic of Tanzania had joined the
sponsors.A/C.3/66/SR.41
3 11-57888
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.35: The right to
development
11. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking as
coordinator of the working group on human rights of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that the
current draft resolution underscored the events held to
commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Declaration on the Right to Development and endorsed
the conclusions and recommendations of the Working
Group on the Right to Development of the Human
Rights Council at its eleventh session.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.36: Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures
12. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking as
coordinator of the working group on human rights of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that, on
numerous occasions, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries had stated its opposition to coercive
measures used as tools to exert political and economic
pressure against any country, and particularly
developing countries. It had also indicated that, under
no circumstances, could a country be deprived of its
means of development and subsistence.
13. The draft resolution reaffirmed that States must
abstain from adopting unilateral coercive measures
contrary to international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. The changes introduced in the current
version included technical innovations and reference to
the elderly and persons with disabilities.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.40: International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
14. Mr. Cabouat (France), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.40 on behalf of the main
sponsors, Argentina, France and Morocco, said that
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cuba, the Czech Republic, Ethiopia,
the Netherlands, Panama, Slovakia, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) had joined the sponsors.
15. The International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance had
entered into force on 23 December 2010 following
ratification by the twentieth State, significantly
extending the protection offered to victims. The
Convention had now been signed by 90 States and 30
States had become parties to it.
16. He commended the Working Group on Enforced
or Involuntary Disappearances on the assistance it had
been providing for almost 30 years to the families of
victims in order to elucidate cases of enforced
disappearance.
17. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Eritrea, Iceland,
Kazakhstan, Mongolia and the Republic of Moldova
had also joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.42: Subregional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
18. Ms. Muhimpundu (Burundi) said that Algeria,
Angola, Chile, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Ethiopia, Ghana, Madagascar, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sao
Tome and Principe and Togo had joined the sponsors.
19. The aim of the draft resolution was to ensure that
the Centre could continue to support member States
achieve greater promotion and protection of human
rights and democracy. The Centre was mandated to
reinforce the relevant national institutions and had also
contributed to the establishment of transitional justice
mechanisms in the countries of the subregion affected
by conflict. The current version of the draft resolution
had been revised to reflect recent events.
20. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Burkina Faso, Chad, the Comoros, Eritrea,
Morocco, the Niger, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia and Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors.
(c) Promotion and protection of human rights:
Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.54, L.55 and L.56)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.54: Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
21. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the main sponsors, the
European Union and Japan, said that Palau had also
joined the sponsors.
22. The General Assembly had adopted resolutions
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea driven by a shared concern
about the grave, widespread and systematic humanA/C.3/66/SR.41
11-57888 4
rights abuses documented in the reports of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
country, as well as in the reports of the Secretary-
General.
23. The text took into account some positive steps
registered during the past year, including some
cooperation with United Nations agencies in
conducting a rapid food security assessment in the
country. Nevertheless, the positive developments were
few, and substantive changes on the ground were
needed.
24. The sponsors of the resolution had informed the
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea about the draft, but as in previous years, the
delegation had refused to engage in discussions. They
hoped that the text reflected the concerns of all parties
who were genuinely interested in giving voice to the
concerns of the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and that it would be adopted with
the broadest support.
25. Lastly, some minor editorial changes were
required. In subparagraph (a) (viii) of the first
operational paragraph, the word “on” should be
inserted after the word “especially”, and in the sixth
line of subparagraph (h) of the fifth operational
paragraph, the word “and” should be deleted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.55: Situation of human
rights in Myanmar
26. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the European Union, said that
Liechtenstein had joined the sponsors.
27. For a number of years, the General Assembly had
adopted resolutions on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar, reflecting the serious concern of the
international community with the situation in the
country. However, over the past few months some
important steps had been taken by the Government
towards national reconciliation.
28. The draft text was based on the reports to the
General Assembly by the Secretary-General, as well as
those of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Myanmar and reflected the positive
steps taken by the Government, as well as the
commitments made. It also addressed the continuing
concerns with regard to the situation of human rights in
the country, including those of ethnic minorities, and
urged the Government to address the issue of justice
and accountability as a central element of national
reconciliation and the transition to democracy.
29. The sponsors preferred a consensus approach and
had drafted the text with that in mind. Discussions had
been held with the country concerned during the
drafting process.
30. Some minor editorial changes should be made. In
the third line of the sixth preambular paragraph a
comma should be added after the words “including
prisoners”. In the first line of paragraph 8, the word
“Notes” should be amended to “Noting” and, in the
second line, the word “and” should be deleted after the
comma. In the second line of paragraph 9, the word
“and” should be added after the comma, and in the fifth
line, the words “and further” should be added after the
comma.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.56: Situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
31. Mr. Rishchynski (Canada), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the main sponsors, said that
Andorra had become a sponsor.
32. The draft resolution had been prepared carefully
to ensure accuracy and to reflect the findings of the
Secretary-General’s report (A/65/361) and the report of
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Islamic Republic of Iran (A/66/374). Concerns
raised in past resolutions remained unaddressed; thus
the situation called for continued international
attention. The draft resolution called on Iran to address
the concerns and to fully respect its human rights
obligations in law and in practice.
33. As the only United Nations body with universal
membership responsible for addressing international
human rights issues, the Third Committee must live up
to its responsibilities. Having requested a report from
the Secretary-General, it must now consider it and take
action. The sponsors hoped that other delegations
would join them in supporting the draft resolution.
Statements made in exercise of the right of reply
34. Mr. Jang Il Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that his delegation categorically rejected
draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.54, which was nothing
more than a political strategy aimed at isolating and
stifling the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.A/C.3/66/SR.41
5 11-57888
The European Union should ponder the merits of
tabling the draft resolution.
35. When the resolution was first adopted in the
former Commission on Human Rights in 2003, the
traditional practice of prior notification to and
negotiation with the concerned country was completely
ignored. The whole process of submission and
adoption of the draft resolution clearly showed that it
pursued ulterior political purposes.
36. No country could claim to have a perfect record
on human rights issues and most of the human rights
violations debated by the Committee, such as
discrimination and violence against women and
children or freedom of expression and opinion, had no
relevance to the reality in his country. The main
sponsors of the draft resolution should reflect on the
human rights record of their own countries, where
social evils and violations were prevalent, and take
measures to address them before criticizing other
countries.
37. The universal periodic review mechanism of the
Human Rights Council, which treated the human rights
situations of all countries on an equal footing, was now
in full operation. The adoption of country-specific
resolutions was therefore an anachronism, and an abuse
of human rights that ran counter to the spirit and
purpose of the United Nations Charter.
38. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
would not give in to such pressure and confrontation
and would firmly defend and safeguard the socialist
system chosen by its people, because it guaranteed full
enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
39. Mr. Mohammad Pour Ferami (Islamic Republic
of Iran) said that the purpose of the draft resolution
introduced by Canada on the situation of human rights
in Iran was certainly not for the promotion and
protection of human rights in his country, but rather it
was a politically-motivated attack on the Government
and people of Iran.
40. The crucial point was that, if Canada was really
concerned about human rights situations, the draft
resolution was not the way to proceed. He was not
trying to counter Canada’s unsubstantiated allegations
by launching a counter-accusation, but he reminded the
Committee of the concerns raised by the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination about the
situation of minority groups in that country, and the
serious concerns expressed to the Human Rights
Council by the Independent Expert on minority issues
regarding the systematic use of racial profiling, and
excessive use of force leading to the death of young
black males, in particular.
41. His delegation believed that the right way to
proceed lay in the sincere willingness and
determination of the countries concerned to work
together and create a favourable environment based on
common understanding and respect for the promotion
of human rights at all levels. His country strongly
believed that “name and shame” tactics, the adoption
of country-specific resolutions, and the manipulation of
the United Nations human rights mechanisms would
not lead to mutually acceptable results.
42. His delegation strongly advised the main
sponsors of the resolution to rectify their own human
rights records and requested all delegations to consider
the politicized nature of the draft resolution and reject
the attempt to impair the credibility and integrity of the
human rights mechanisms.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.21)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.21: Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women
43. The Chair said he had been advised that the draft
resolution contained no programme budget
implications.
44. Ms. Leveaux (Sweden) said that Armenia,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, Lebanon,
Mali, Rwanda, San Marino, Thailand and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution.
45. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Antigua and Barbuda Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, the Comoros, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mongolia, Morocco,
Namibia, Nicaragua, the Niger, the Philippines, South
Africa, Suriname, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia and
Uzbekistan had joined the sponsors.A/C.3/66/SR.41
11-57888 6
46. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.21 was adopted.
47. Ms. Phipps (United States of America), speaking
in explanation of position, said that the Obama
administration was a strong supporter of the
Convention and was committed to its ratification by
the United States of America. However, her delegation
wished to note that, by joining consensus on the
resolution, which welcomed the reports of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women on five of its sessions, her Government
was not indicating its agreement with the entire
contents of those reports. While it concurred with
much that was said in the reports, there were aspects
with which it did not agree.
48. Despite the foregoing, the United States of
America was a strong supporter of the goals and
purposes of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women as well as of the United
Nations, in general, in promoting the human rights of
women around the world.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.