United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.44
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
19 December 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-59768 (E)
*0759768*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 44th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 14 November 2007, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.44
07-59768 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.29,
A/C.3/62/L.68-L.77)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29: Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty
Proposed amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.68
1. The Chairman drew attention to the proposed
amendments to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
contained in documents A/C.3/62/L.68-L.77, none of
which had any programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), speaking on a point of order,
asked who had requested a recorded vote on the
proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/62/L.68.
3. The Chairman said that the main delegations
making the request were Albania, Angola, Brazil,
Croatia, Gabon, Mexico, New Zealand, the Philippines,
Portugal and Timor-Leste.
4. Mr. Heller (Mexico), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations
reflected the resolve of Member States to join in
maintaining international peace and security,
promoting economic and social well-being, reaffirming
faith in the dignity and worth of the human person, and
ensuring respect for human rights of men and women
everywhere. For over 50 years the Charter had been a
source of international human rights precedents. Had
the focus been on only one of the Charter’s principles,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights would not exist.
The sponsors of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
reaffirmed their commitment to all of the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, as reflected in the
first preambular paragraph of the draft resolution.
Therefore, the proposed amendment was unnecessary
and a clear attempt to hinder the discussion of matters
relevant to the Committee’s mandate. Resorting to
selective quotations from the Charter would undermine
its contents and set an unfortunate precedent, to the
detriment of all Member States. Mexico reaffirmed its
commitment to all the purposes and principles of the
Charter, which should be taken as a whole, without
giving some precedence over others. A vote against the
proposed amendment was thus not a vote against the
Charter but a vote against a clear attempt to undermine
its integrity. Mexico would therefore vote against the
proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/62/L.68 and urged other delegations to do
likewise.
5. Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, and in explanation of vote before
the voting, said that a reference to the Charter of the
United Nations was a reference to all of its Articles;
therefore there was no need for a specific reference to a
specific Article. The Charter had to be read and
understood in its entirety, as selective quotations only
weakened its significance. It was very unusual,
especially on human rights issues, for resolutions to
include such selective quotations. A General Assembly
resolution regarding a moratorium on the use of the
death penalty did not violate the sovereignty of any
Member State and was not an intervention under
Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter. As reflected in
Articles 10 to 14 of the Charter, General Assembly
resolutions were referred to as “recommendations”. In
keeping with the purposes and principles of the
Charter, in particular the purpose of cooperation, the
promotion and protection of all human rights was a
legitimate concern of the international community. The
proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/62/L.68 was hostile to the spirit and letter of
draft resolution in A/C.3/62/L.29. His delegation would
vote against it and invited all Member States to do the
same.
6. Mr. Nikuljski (The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia), speaking in explanation of vote before the
voting, said that protection and promotion of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms was a priority in
accordance with all of the purposes and principles of
the Charter. It was unnecessary to make selective
quotations from the Charter, especially since a general
reference to the Charter, and thus to all of its relevant
Articles, had been given. The Charter was the basis of
the Organization and must be considered in its entirety,
not quoted selectively. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
did not impose measures on any State and did not
violate sovereignty. The proposed amendment wasA/C.3/62/SR.44
3 07-59768
unnecessary and absolutely contrary to the spirit and
letter of the draft resolution. His delegation therefore
objected to the proposed change in the first preambular
paragraph, would vote against the proposed
amendment, and invited all Member States to do
likewise.
7. Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that his
delegation was constrained to abstain in the voting on
the proposed amendments to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 because it believed that the Charter of
the United Nations was a constitutional and universal
instrument whose provisions could not and should not
be interpreted or cited in isolation or in contradiction
with the remainder of the instrument. Rather, it should
be read, understood and interpreted as a harmonious
and comprehensive whole, each part being understood
in accordance with the other parts. The preferred
interpretation should be one that reconciled the
Charter’s provisions, not one that gave certain clauses
precedence over others. It was regrettable that Charter
provisions should be cited in a truncated manner,
weakening both the Charter and other basic human
rights instruments.
8. Mr. Makanga (Gabon), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that the United Nations
had from its inception adopted a number of resolutions
which, in principle, pertained to the sovereignty of
States. At the 2005 World Summit, Heads of State and
Government had recognized that human rights were a
cornerstone of the United Nations. In recent years,
Member States had signed and ratified several human
rights instruments dealing with penal issues. In so
doing, they had acknowledged that issues pertaining to
domestic penal law had to be reviewed in accordance
with applicable international standards. Several articles
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well
as several articles of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, referred to penal matters.
Indeed, the Security Council had established
international criminal tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda in order to prosecute
crimes committed within State jurisdictions. In 2002,
the International Criminal Court had been established
to prosecute war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity. It was therefore clear that any reference to
Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter of the United
Nations was superfluous, giving the impression that
penal issues fell within the exclusive jurisdiction of
States and departing from the aim of the draft
resolution, which was to declare a moratorium on
executions. A reference to Article 1, paragraph 3, of the
Charter, stressing the imperative need for Member
States to enhance international cooperation in order to
promote and encourage respect for human rights,
would be more appropriate. For those reasons, his
country would vote against the proposed amendment
and urged other Member States to follow suit.
9. Mr. Davide (Philippines), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that his
country, a founding member of the United Nations, had
the highest regard for the principles and provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, including Article 2,
paragraph 7, and had from the outset played an active
role in promoting the self-determination and
independence of States, in keeping with the principle
that each State should be free to decide its future. Since
draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 already contained a
reaffirmation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter, it was unnecessary to single out any one of
them. His country also subscribed to the principle
pacta sunt servanda in international law, in particular
as articulated in article 26 of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties, which based the implementation
of obligations upon good faith. His country’s
understanding of that good-faith basis implied that a
party to an international agreement such as the Charter
of the United Nations should not invoke provisions of
its domestic law as a justification for failure to perform
its obligations. Moreover, Article 2, paragraph 7, of the
Charter could not be cited against draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 because the latter involved an issue that
was not essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of
any State. The draft resolution involved a matter that
fell squarely within the ambit of the principle of
fundamental human rights and the dignity and worth of
the human person, or the right to life itself, which was
at the heart of the preamble of the Charter. That
universal principle was certainly not within the
domestic jurisdiction of any State. The Philippines
would therefore vote against the proposed amendment
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.68.
10. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that a
moratorium on the death penalty had been in effect in
his country for several years. His country was
committed to strict compliance with its international
commitments in the protection and promotion of
human rights. It therefore supported draft resolutionA/C.3/62/SR.44
07-59768 4
A/C.3/62/L.29. The Charter of the United Nations was
the main international multilateral agreement, on which
all the activity of the Organization was based. At the
same time, references to Charter provisions were
acceptable in any documents or decisions of United
Nations bodies or agencies. His country would
therefore vote in favour of the proposed amendment
(A/C.3/62/L.68) and for other proposed amendments if
they were based on the Charter or on other
international legal documents to which Russia was a
State party.
11. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.68.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Central
African Republic, China, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Congo, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya,
Lebanon, Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Republic of
Korea, South Africa, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Zambia.
12. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.68
was rejected by 82 votes to 73, with 15 abstentions.
13. Mr. Menon (Singapore) said that he was
astonished at the rejection of the proposed amendment,
which essentially reproduced the wording of the
Charter. The Charter was the basis of the Organization,
which bound Member States together and determined
how they interacted. In fact, the Charter made no
reference to the abolition of the death penalty but it did
contain a provision stating that nothing authorized the
United Nations to intervene in matters within the
domestic jurisdiction of any State. Clearly, some
countries had voted to ignore a Charter provision
because they found it incompatible with their purposes;
perhaps in future they would ignore and re-interpret
other Charter provisions or even the entire Charter.
14. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) placed on record his
delegation’s disappointment at the result of the voting.
Despite sincere attempts to improve the language of
the draft resolution, some delegations had voted
against the Charter, against the basis of cooperation
and respect and against the foundations of the
Organization.
15. Ms. Borjas Chávez (El Salvador) said that her
country reaffirmed its commitment to all of the
purposes and principles contained in the Charter as a
coherent whole. El Salvador had been obliged to vote
against the proposed amendment because it considered
it unnecessary. It was a partial quotation of the Charter
and, as such, detrimental to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29.A/C.3/62/SR.44
5 07-59768
16. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana) expressed his
delegation’s disappointment at the rejection of the
proposed amendment. The issue was not whether a
country had abolished the death penalty or instituted a
moratorium; the issue was about framing the debate in
accordance with the Charter. The decision to vote
against the Charter set a very dangerous precedent. The
trend would probably continue in the future, with
references to the Charter being reinterpreted to suit
certain ends.
Proposed amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.69
17. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) introducing the proposed
amendment, said he recognized that some countries
had voluntarily decided to abolish the death penalty,
others had decided to apply a moratorium on
executions, and others had chosen to retain the death
penalty. Each was right and none should impose its
view on the others. The proposed amendment had been
presented in that spirit and he hoped that Member
States would vote in favour of it.
18. Ms. Zhang Dan (China), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that her delegation
supported the proposed amendment and called upon
other countries to do likewise. Determining appropriate
penalties according to a country’s national
circumstances was a sovereign right in which no other
country had the right to intervene. The death penalty
was not prohibited by international law. China attached
great importance to the issue of the death penalty and
applied stringent restrictions upon its implementation,
ensuring that it was used only on those few who had
committed the most serious crimes. China opposed any
attempt to intervene in a country’s judicial
independence.
19. Mr. Spatafora (Italy), said that in the voting on
the proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/62/L.68 the majority of the Committee had not
voted against an article of the Charter and set a
dangerous precedent, as had been alleged. The record
should show that the majority had voted against a
selective quotation from the Charter. The proposed
amendment attempted to imply improper interference
with the way in which States organized their legal and
criminal systems. That was obviously not the case. The
sponsors of the draft resolution believed that the
promotion of a moratorium did not constitute a form of
intervention in domestic jurisdiction. While
encouraged by a worldwide trend towards abolition of
the death penalty, with over 130 countries having
established a de facto moratorium on executions, the
sponsors fully recognized that decisions regarding the
death penalty had to be taken by each country at the
national level. The draft resolution did not state that
the death penalty was contrary to international law, nor
did it single out particular States; it simply focused on
a moratorium with a view to abolishing the death
penalty.
20. Mr. Menon (Singapore), speaking on a point of
order, said that the Chairman had invited general
statements on document A/C.3/62/L.69. The
representative of Italy was speaking on A/C.3/62/L.68
and should be requested to address the issue at hand.
21. Mr. Spatafora (Italy) speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that the proposed
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.69
sought to undermine draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29.
His delegation therefore strongly rejected it and invited
all Member States to vote against it.
22. Mr. Peralta (Paraguay), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that the proposed
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.69
suggested indirectly that the sponsors of draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29, which included his country,
were attempting to dictate how States should organize
their judicial and penal systems. That was far from the
truth. The main purpose of the draft resolution was to
call upon Member States to establish a moratorium on
executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty.
The proposed amendment sought to weaken the content
and purpose of the draft resolution, and he appealed to
all Member States to vote against it.
23. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.69.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China,
Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,A/C.3/62/SR.44
07-59768 6
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United States of America, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Ghana,
Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia, Mali,
Morocco, Niger, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka,
Swaziland, Togo, United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia.
24. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.69
was rejected by 83 votes to 68, with 18 abstentions.
25. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 constituted an attempt by certain
countries to impose their will and views on all Member
States. The proposed amendment contained in
document A/C.3/62/L.69 would have averted that
attempt, and his delegation was therefore deeply
disappointed that it had been rejected.
26. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation, too, was disappointed at the result of the
voting. The proposed amendment would merely have
affirmed two fundamental principles on the basis of
which Member States had joined the Organization,
namely the equal sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs.
Proposed amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.70
27. Mr. Menon (Singapore), recalling his previous
remarks on the proposed amendments to draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29, called on all delegations to
vote in favour of the proposed amendment contained in
document A/C.3/62/L.70.
28. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that the proposed
amendment reaffirmed that every Member State had an
inalienable right to choose its political, economic,
social and cultural systems, which was one of the
fundamental principles governing international
relations and the work of the United Nations. Respect
for that right was the basis for all dialogue and
cooperation between States. The proposed amendment
would restore balance to the draft resolution, and he
urged all delegations to vote in favour of it.
29. Ms. Borges (Timor-Leste), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that there
had been ample opportunity for delegations to propose
amendments during the informal consultations on draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29. The proposed amendment
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.70 had not been
presented at that time. Moreover, it sought to
undermine the spirit and purpose of the draft
resolution. Promotion of a moratorium on the use of
the death penalty did not constitute a form of
intervention in the domestic jurisdiction of a State or
an attempt to impose the views of certain States on
others. Rather, the purpose of the resolution was to
reinforce and encourage the growing trend towards the
phasing-out of the death penalty. The 1993 World
Conference on Human Rights had agreed that the
promotion and protection of all human rights was a
legitimate concern of the international community. By
becoming parties to United Nations human rights
treaties, States undertook to comply with their
obligations under those treaties. Her delegation would
vote against the proposed amendment and urged others
to do the same.A/C.3/62/SR.44
7 07-59768
30. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that article 6 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
made it clear that capital punishment was a human
rights issue. Moreover, the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, adopted by consensus in 1993,
stated that the promotion and protection of all human
rights was a legitimate concern of the international
community. In that context, and as a sponsor of draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29, his delegation would vote
against the proposed amendment contained in
document A/C.3/62/L.70 and urged others to do
likewise.
31. Mr. Neritani (Albania), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 had started a process of dialogue on an
issue of fundamental importance for the enhancement
and progressive development of human rights: the right
to life, as affirmed in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. General Assembly resolutions had a
recommendatory nature; as such, the purpose of the
draft resolution was not to interfere in the internal
affairs of States but merely to promote a moratorium
on the use of the death penalty in recognition of a
growing trend among States in that direction. In the
broad context of human rights issues, the proposed
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.70 did
not adequately reflect the restrictions placed on State
action by the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. Moreover, the wording was not in
keeping with the type of language usually used in
Third Committee draft resolutions. All Member States
were bound by the letter and spirit of the Charter;
selective quotations from it would not change that fact.
His delegation would vote against the proposed
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.70 and
urged others to do the same.
32. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.70.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Central
African Republic, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Cambodia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji,
Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Mali,
Morocco, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, United
Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
33. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.70
was rejected by 83 votes to 72, with 15 abstentions.
34. Mr. Menon (Singapore) said that he was
surprised by the Committee’s rejection of the proposed
amendment, which merely affirmed a basic principle
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, namelyA/C.3/62/SR.44
07-59768 8
that every Member State had the right to choose its
political, economic, social and cultural systems. By
rejecting the proposed amendment, the Committee
seemed to be saying that the European Union countries
and other sponsors of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
had the right to determine how other Member States
should behave. Many States had struggled for years to
gain their sovereignty from the very countries that now
sought to curtail it. They should not be so ready to
abrogate their rights and responsibilities as sovereign
States. The vote further confirmed that some
delegations were cynical in their support for the
principles of the Charter; there was no room for
selectivity regarding which principles to support or
reject. If certain States wished to persuade others of the
merits of a moratorium on the death penalty, they
should do so at the bilateral level rather than dividing
the Committee on the issue.
35. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that the vote on the
proposed amendment was disappointing and served to
reaffirm his delegation’s concern that certain States
were attempting to impose their views on others,
despite the statements made to the contrary.
Proposed amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.71
36. Mr. Degia (Barbados) said that one of the major
shortcomings of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 was
that it was based on the assumption that the death
penalty was prohibited in international law, which was
untrue. The proposed amendment was a quotation from
article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, which permitted the imposition of the
death penalty for serious crimes. His delegation saw no
reason, in a draft resolution advocating a moratorium
on the death penalty, not to include a caveat making it
clear that the death penalty was not prohibited in
international law. It would be surprising if the
proposed amendment were rejected, since most
Member States were parties to the Covenant.
37. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana) expressed his
delegation’s unease at the refusal of the main sponsors
of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 to engage in
constructive dialogue with all delegations in informal
consultations, with a view to ensuring that all concerns
were considered on their merits. The main sponsors
had also refused, on the basis of a flawed argument
against selective quotations, to acknowledge the
relevant provisions of various international instruments
in the draft resolution. Faced with such an inflexible
approach, delegations with concerns about the draft
resolution had had no other recourse but to propose
formal amendments. The proposed amendment
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.71, which recalled
article 6, paragraph 2, of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, disproved the assertion that
the sponsors of the proposed amendments were aiming
to undermine the draft resolution. If that were true,
they would not be insisting on the inclusion of
safeguards. The refusal to acknowledge the provisions
of an international treaty undermined the importance of
that treaty.
38. Mr. Margarian (Armenia), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
sponsors of the proposed amendment had characterized
the draft resolution as a European Union-led initiative
when in fact it was a cross-regional initiative. The
second preambular paragraph of the draft resolution
mentioned the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, which was one of the most widely
ratified international instruments. It was therefore
unnecessary to include selective quotations from the
Covenant in the draft resolution. The purpose of the
quotation in document A/C.3/62/L.71 was to
emphasize that the death penalty was permitted under
the Covenant. However, article 6, paragraph 6, of the
Covenant provided that nothing in that article could be
invoked to delay or to prevent the abolition of capital
punishment by any State party. The proposed
amendment was therefore contrary to the content and
spirit of the Covenant and of the draft resolution, and
he appealed to all delegations to vote against it.
39. Mr. Tarragô (Brazil), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that the preamble to draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 made a general reference to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, since it was one of the major international
instruments pertinent to the issue of the death penalty
and had been widely ratified. The draft resolution had
been modified during informal consultations precisely
in order to accommodate the concerns of certain
delegations about the inclusion of selective quotations
from international instruments. The proposed
amendment reintroduced such a selective quotation,
which failed to reflect the fact that, although the
Covenant did not prohibit the death penalty, it did refer
to the desirability of its abolition. The proposed
amendment therefore ran counter to the spirit of bothA/C.3/62/SR.44
9 07-59768
the Covenant and the draft resolution. His delegation
would vote against it and encouraged all others to do
the same.
40. Ms. Banks (New Zealand), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, endorsed the
comments made by the representatives of Armenia and
Brazil. The proposed amendment contained in
document A/C.3/62/L.71 was misleading and
unbalanced because it was a selective quotation of the
type which the sponsors of the draft resolution had
tried to avoid in response to concerns expressed by
certain delegations. Moreover, the Human Rights
Committee, which oversaw the implementation of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
often referred to the death penalty in terms that
suggested the desirability of abolition. Her delegation
would therefore vote against the proposed amendment
and hoped that others would follow suit.
41. Mr. Jesus (Angola), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that not only the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
but also the Second Optional Protocol thereto
advocated the abolition of the death penalty. His
delegation would vote against the proposed amendment
for that reason, as well as the reasons outlined by
previous speakers.
42. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.71.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Central African
Republic, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Nauru, Niger, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahamas, Bhutan, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia,
Mali, Morocco, Nigeria, Republic of Korea,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, United Arab Emirates,
Zambia.
43. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.71
was rejected by 82 votes to 68, with 19 abstentions.
44. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that his delegation had
voted in favour of the proposed amendment, since
Egypt was a party to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. It was disappointing that not
all the parties to the Covenant had done likewise. The
proposed amendment would not have introduced
selectivity into the draft resolution; rather, the decision
to ignore the main international instrument relevant to
the issue of the death penalty was a form of selectivity.
45. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran),
endorsing the comments made by the representative of
Egypt, said that his delegation respected the choice
made by certain countries to abolish the death penalty
or introduce a moratorium on its use. However, the
same respect and understanding should be extended toA/C.3/62/SR.44
07-59768 10
other countries in different situations which chose to
impose the death penalty for the most serious crimes,
in accordance with article 6, paragraph 2, of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
His country was in a region that was a major transit
route for drugs; thousands of its law-enforcement
officers had died at the hands of drug traffickers.
Moreover, the main market for those drugs was in the
very European countries which were advocating a
moratorium on the use of the death penalty. His
country felt that the death penalty was necessary in
order to enforce its zero-tolerance policy, and a
moratorium could not, therefore, be accepted.
46. Mr. Degia (Barbados) expressed his delegation’s
disappointment at the outcome of the voting and said
that it had been appropriate to quote a provision of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
that explicitly allowed for the death penalty. Being a
party to the Covenant was not inconsistent with
supporting the amendment.
Proposed amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.72
47. Mr. Degia (Barbados), introducing the proposed
amendment, said that it would make draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 less one-sided. According to a
fundamental principle of international law,
international instruments were binding only on the
respective States parties.
48. Mr. Delacroix (France), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that the sponsors of draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 would have taken a positive
view of a general reference to the Second Optional
Protocol to the International Convention on Civil and
Political Rights, if that reference had been coupled
with a call for the Protocol’s prompt ratification. The
proposed amendment, however, was a biased
interpretation of the Protocol. Any reinterpretation of
human rights instruments should be avoided.
49. Ms. Kozar (Croatia), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that her country would
have favoured a general reference to the Optional
Protocol accompanied by a call for its prompt
ratification. By making a selective reference to the
Protocol, however, the proposed amendment
undermined both draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 and
the Protocol itself.
50. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.72.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Central African
Republic, China, Comoros, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Nauru, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Suriname,
Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uzbekistan,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahamas, Bhutan, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon,
Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, RepublicA/C.3/62/SR.44
11 07-59768
of Korea, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab Emirates,
Zambia.
51. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.72
was rejected by 82 votes to 65, with 22 abstentions.
52. Mr. Degia (Barbados) expressed his delegation’s
disappointment at the rejection of a reasonable
amendment.
Proposed amendment to draft resolution A/C.3//62/L.29
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.73
53. Mr. Menon (Singapore), introducing the
proposed amendment, emphasized that the sponsors’
aim was to dissolve the false impression that there was
unanimous approval of the work of the Commission on
Human Rights in relation to the death penalty.
Actually, many States had signed statements of
disassociation. Rejecting the amendment would be to
deny that fact.
54. Mr. Labbe (Chile) said that draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 was consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations and the international human rights
instruments and reflected many resolutions adopted by
the Commission on Human Rights in numerous
sessions. Those antecedents had aimed at the definitive
disappearance of the death penalty worldwide. It was
therefore reasonable to refer briefly to the most recent
of those resolutions.
55. Mr. Nikulyski (The Former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia), speaking in explanation of vote before
the voting, said that the Commission on Human Rights
had already adopted resolutions that called for a
moratorium on executions and that the proposed
amendment was unnecessary.
56. Mr. Belle (Belgium) said that it was customary
for draft resolutions presented to the Committee to
contain references to important related resolutions
already adopted by the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council or the Commission on
Human Rights but not to national declarations of
disassociation.
57. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.73.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Niger,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bhutan, Cambodia, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya,
Lebanon, Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Nigeria,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Sri
Lanka, Swaziland, Zambia.A/C.3/62/SR.44
07-59768 12
58. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.73
was rejected by 82 votes to 67, with 19 abstentions.
59. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that the vote had denied
a fact and imposed on many States a viewpoint that
they did not share, preventing them from expressing
their opinions.
60. Mr. Menon (Singapore) said that, by denying a
historical fact, the amendment had set a dangerous
precedent.
Proposed amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.74
61. Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda), introducing
the proposed amendment, said that all delegations
should respect diversity, which was a reality.
62. Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that the amendment,
which had not been proposed during the informal
negotiations in the draft resolution, should be
considered an attempt to change the latter’s object and
purpose. Although there was a reasonable amount of
diversity between different legal systems there was
also extensive common ground, and many rules were
suitable at all times and in all places. Currently, 130
countries in all regions of the world had abolished the
death penalty in law and in practice. Invoking cultural
diversity as an argument for not applying the same
rules everywhere ran counter to the principles of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Regardless of
their political systems, all States should fully promote
human rights and fundamental freedoms. The sponsors
of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 had no intention of
imposing their views on others.
63. Ms. Borges (Timor-Leste), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 reflected the provisions of the
main international human rights instruments regarding
the death penalty. The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights stated that cultural diversity should be respected
only where it did not run counter to fundamental rights.
64. Ms. Schmidt-Gutzat (Montenegro), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
sponsors of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 had
provided numerous opportunities for the formulation of
specific proposals during informal negotiations. The
proposed amendment, which had not been presented
then, was an attempt to alter the aim of the draft
resolution. The abolition of the death penalty, in law or
in practice, by 130 countries showed that no particular
system or circumstances could be an obstacle to
declaring a moratorium on executions or abolishing the
death penalty.
65. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.74.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Central
African Republic, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the formerA/C.3/62/SR.44
13 07-59768
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Cambodia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji,
Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Mali,
Morocco, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation,
Sri Lanka, Zambia.
66. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.63/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.74
was rejected by 83 votes to 71, with 15 abstentions.
67. Mr. Menon (Singapore) emphasized that the
rejected amendment had been a factual statement. Not
all rules were appropriate for all places at all times.
Failure to acknowledge that fact was tantamount to
maintaining that all States should have legal systems
similar to those of the sponsors.
68. Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda) expressed
regret that the amendment had not been approved, and
said that the vote had shown that there was no
international consensus on the death penalty.
69. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran),
expressed regret that the amendment had been rejected,
and said that universality was not synonymous with
conformity. Cultural diversity and universality were
not incompatible but reinforced each other.
Proposed amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.75
70. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana), introducing the
proposed amendment, said that draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 lacked balance. Its sponsors had failed
to acknowledge the fact that many Member States
maintained the death penalty for the most serious
crimes. A balanced representation of the various
conceptions of justice and avoidance of double
standards were prerequisites for constructive
deliberations.
71. Mr. Alvarez (Uruguay) said the proposed
amendment was not in keeping with operative
paragraph 2 (c) of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 and
should therefore be rejected.
72. Ms. Banks (New Zealand) said that the factual
nature of the proposed amendment did not justify its
adoption. The statistical figures spoke for themselves.
More than two thirds of the United Nations
membership had abolished the death penalty in law or
in practice. The amendment was contrary to the spirit
of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29, which aimed at
phasing out the death penalty.
73. Mr. Ney (Germany) agreed with the
representative of Botswana that, in discussing the draft
resolution, delegations should stick to the facts. The
facts were that currently 130 countries had abolished
the death penalty in practice, whereas in 1948, when
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights had been
adopted, only eight countries had done so. Only 25
countries had carried out executions in 2006. In the
past 25 years alone, 61 countries had abolished the
death penalty for all crimes. There was also no denying
that capital punishment was irreversible and
irreparable. No country or legal system was immune to
miscarriages of justice. The proposed amendment was
hostile to the spirit and letter of draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29.
74. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.75.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Central African
Republic, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.A/C.3/62/SR.44
07-59768 14
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bhutan, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji,
Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Mali,
Morocco, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, Zambia.
75. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.75
was rejected by 83 votes to 72, with 14 abstentions.
76. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana) expressed
disappointment at the result of the voting. The sponsors
of the proposed amendment had merely intended to
provide some balance to the text of draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29, which ignored a number of simple
facts.
77. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran)
said that his delegation had voted in favour of the
proposed amendment in recognition of the fact that
many Member States retained the death penalty. Some
delegations had bandied about misleading statistics,
claiming that an “increasing” number of States had
imposed a moratorium on capital punishment. In fact,
however, 67 States conducted executions, 11 more that
did so only for serious crimes, and a further 29 had
imposed only a 10-year moratorium. Thus a total of
107 States legally recognized the death penalty, as
against the 90 that had imposed a moratorium.
Proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.76
78. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana) said that, in addition
to the points he had raised at the forty-third meeting,
he wished to draw attention to the double standards
applied by the opponents of the proposed amendment,
who suggested that only the death penalty was
irreversible and irreparable. The life imprisonment of
an innocent person was equally wrong and the years of
life lost could not be regained. It was, in any case, an
affront to the legal systems of the sponsors of the
proposed amendment to suggest that an innocent
person might be convicted or executed. In Botswana, it
had never been shown that an innocent person had been
executed. In any case, the remote possibility of an
innocent person being executed was surely preferable
to the release of a murderer on a legal technicality.
Opponents of the proposed amendment should rather
improve the checks and balances in their criminal
justice systems to prevent miscarriages of justice.
79. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran)
said that the deterrent value of the death penalty
imposed only for the most serious crimes had been
endorsed by many legal systems, on the ground that the
right to life of the many was more important than that
of a mass murderer or a war criminal. The deterrent
effect of capital punishment was proved by the fact that
many countries preferred to impose a moratorium
rather than to abolish the death penalty outright.
Abolitionists who denied its deterrent value should
indicate how innocent people should be protected
against war criminals, mass murderers, serial killers,
armed drug-traffickers or escaped convicts. Moreover,
if such people received life sentences, the question
arose as to who would pay the cost and who would
guarantee that they would remain in prison for life,
especially in areas of social or political instability.
80. Ms. Pohjankukka (Finland) said that, following
open consultations, draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 had
received wide support. The proposed amendment
contained in document A/C.3/62/L.76 changed the
overall thrust of the fifth preambular paragraph of the
draft resolution. There was no conclusive evidence of
the deterrent effect of the death penalty; nor could the
irreversibility of capital punishment be disputed. The
proposed amendment undermined the spirit and
purpose of the draft resolution.A/C.3/62/SR.44
15 07-59768
81. Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein) said that the fifth
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution had four
objectives, all of which were firmly grounded in
international law, whereas the proposed amendment
addressed only one. Moreover, the latter stated that
“some” Member States viewed the death penalty as a
deterrent for the most serious crimes, thus implying
that other States did not. It was hard to see what
objection there could be to the very neutral statement
in the fifth preambular paragraph of the draft resolution
that there was no conclusive evidence of the death
penalty’s deterrent value. Lastly, he was intrigued by
the suggestion that imprisonment was as irreversible as
execution. A prisoner could be released and even
compensated; a person who had been executed was
dead.
82. Mr. Kruljević (Serbia) said that the proposed
amendment undermined the spirit and purpose of the
draft resolution. His delegation was a sponsor of the
latter, since it was not convinced that the death penalty
was a deterrent and believed, on the contrary, that a
moratorium on its use would lead to the enhancement
and progressive development of human rights.
83. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.76.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada,
Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Myanmar, Nauru, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bhutan, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana,
Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia, Mali,
Morocco, Niger, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka,
Zambia.
84. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.76
was rejected by 83 votes to 67, with 15 abstentions.
85. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana) said it was regrettable
that the proposed amendment had been rejected on the
flimsiest of grounds.
86. Mr. Degia (Barbados) said that a number of the
arguments put forward against the proposed
amendment had been blatantly one-sided, based on
selective quotation. As for the claim that consultations
had been held, the delegations that had sponsored the
proposed amendment had not been allowed to explain
their position or to negotiate the question of a
moratorium, which was by no means certain to lead to
the enhancement or progressive development of human
rights. Any resolution on the issue should also address
the questions of enhancing the right to development,
the right to food and the right not to live in poverty.A/C.3/62/SR.44
07-59768 16
Proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.77
87. Ms. Booker (Bahamas) said that, much as her
delegation respected States that had applied a
moratorium on the use of the death penalty, the aim of
the proposed amendment was to balance the sixth
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution so that it
would cover also those that had not applied such a
moratorium.
88 Mr. Makanga (Gabon) said that he saw no
reason to change the existing wording of the sixth
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution, which
welcomed the decision by an increasing number of
States to apply a moratorium on — not to abolish —
the death penalty.
89. Mr. Staur (Denmark) said that his delegation
could not support the proposed amendment for a
number of reasons. First, a draft resolution on a
moratorium on the use of the death penalty should
welcome rather than simply take note of States’
decisions in that regard. Secondly, it was indisputable
that an increasing number of States had applied such a
moratorium. Moreover, it was entirely superfluous to
insert the word “voluntarily”; such a decision could not
but be voluntary. In that connection, he noted that, in
order to accommodate the concerns of some States, the
sponsors had changed the wording of the sixth
preambular paragraph. To change the sequencing
between a moratorium and abolition, as suggested in
the proposed amendment, however, was unacceptable.
90. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.77.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Central African
Republic, China, Comoros, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bhutan, Cambodia, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya,
Lebanon, Mali, Morocco, Republic of Korea, Sri
Lanka, Zambia.
91. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.77
was rejected by 81 votes to 70, with 15 abstentions.
92. Ms. Booker (Bahamas) said that, as the debate
developed, the only “increase” to be observed was in
the number of votes in favour of the proposed
amendment.
93. Mr. Degia (Barbados) said that opponents of the
proposed amendment had spoken of a trend to halt
abolition and of the 130 countries that had allegedly
applied a moratorium to the use of capital punishment.
Such figures were misleading. His own country was
often claimed to be abolitionist, because it had not
carried out any executions for the past 25 years, but it
did not consider itself to be so. He noted, moreover,A/C.3/62/SR.44
17 07-59768
that even some sponsors of draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 had voted for the proposed amendments
contained in documents A/C.3/62/L.75, L.76 and L.77.
94. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana) said that it was
regrettable that the proposed amendment had been
rejected, since it had provided a balanced reflection of
the issues concerned. He added that nearly all the
sponsors of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 had, in
abolishing the death penalty or in applying a
moratorium, moved at their own pace. That was the
gradual approach that the proposed amendment had
aimed to promote.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.