United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.46
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
18 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-64070 (E)
*1064070*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 46th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 16 November 2010, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 61: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 65: Indigenous issues (continued)
Agenda item 66: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/65/SR.46
10-64070 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.60: Global efforts for the
total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
1. Mr. Al-Shami (Yemen), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said
that the text focused on the activities surrounding the
upcoming tenth anniversary of the 2001 World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, which was
expected to culminate in an outcome document
affirming the global resolve to end racism. The
sponsors had chosen not to submit a separate draft
resolution on the organization of related activities on
the understanding that the President of the General
Assembly would be appointing a facilitator to complete
that task. The draft resolution also included the issue of
racism in sport, and encouraged the Fédération
international de football association (FIFA) to continue
its anti-racism initiatives in the 2014 World Cup
tournament. In the draft resolution, the Group of 77
and China recognized the important work
accomplished through the follow-up mechanisms to the
Durban Declaration and, in fulfilment of paragraph 101
of the Declaration, called for financial support for the
project to build a permanent memorial at the United
Nations to the victims of slavery.
2. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation had joined
the sponsors.
Agenda item 61: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.24/Rev.1: Enlargement of
the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
3. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
4. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Afghanistan, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Egypt had joined the sponsors.
5. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.24/Rev.1 was adopted.
Agenda item 65: Indigenous issues (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.22/Rev.1: Indigenous issues
6. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
7. Mr. Solón (Bolivia) said that the draft resolution
proposed a high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly on the rights of indigenous peoples, to be
held in 2014, and called for an expansion of the
mandate of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Indigenous Populations in order to increase the
participation of indigenous peoples in the sessions of
treaty bodies. He noted the following revision to
paragraph 7 of the English version of the draft
resolution: the word “people” should be replaced with
the word “peoples”. He announced that Brazil, Canada,
New Zealand and the United States of America had
joined the sponsors.
8. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Armenia, Chile, Congo, Croatia, Cyprus,
Estonia, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, Paraguay and
Spain had also joined the sponsors.
9. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.22/Rev.1 was adopted
as orally revised.
10. Mr. Soares (United Kingdom), speaking in
explanation of position, said that his delegation
supported the draft resolution on the understanding that
the rights of indigenous peoples referred to in the text
were those set out in the Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples. In that regard, his delegation
strongly endorsed the reference to the Declaration in
the third preambular paragraph. With the exception of
the right to self-determination, the United Kingdom did
not recognize the concept of collective human rights in
international law. Individuals within groups must not
be left unprotected by allowing the rights of the group
to supersede individual human rights. The United
Kingdom had made that long-standing position explicit
at the time the Declaration had been adopted, both
within the General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council.A/C.3/65/SR.46
3 10-64070
11. References to the rights of indigenous peoples in
the draft resolution should be interpreted as the
individual human rights bestowed on all people under
international law. That position was without prejudice
to the fact that the Government of the United Kingdom
recognized that many States with indigenous
populations had granted them collective rights in their
constitutions and national laws. Accordingly, his
delegation was concerned with the proposal in
paragraph 10 for an agenda item in the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly to be entitled “Rights
of indigenous peoples”, which was a departure from
the established title, “Indigenous issues”. Furthermore,
his delegation believed that the high-level plenary
meeting proposed in paragraph 8 should focus on
reviewing implementation of the Declaration, which
was the most effective tool to enhance the protection
and promotion of the rights of indigenous peoples.
Agenda item 66: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.50: Inadmissibility of
certain practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
12. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ethiopia, Gabon, India, Namibia, Nigeria, Seychelles
and Viet Nam had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution. Noting that in 2010 the international
community had celebrated the sixty-fifth anniversary
of the end of the Second World War, a war whose
victims included millions whose lives had been cut
short by the application of theories of racial
supremacy, he regretted the insistence by certain States
to put the draft to the vote, which was tantamount to
distorting the facts of history. The resolution was,
among other things, a tribute to those whose sacrifice
had brought about the creation of the United Nations.
In that context, he deplored the increasing glorification
of Nazism and its proponents and the rise of skinhead
and neo-Nazi groups, which drew their inspiration
from ideologies that the United Nations had been set
up to counter and perpetrated acts deemed offences
punishable by law under article 4 of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination. Tolerating such phenomena could not
be dismissed as a matter of political correctness but
was rather a manifestation of deep cynicism,
defamatory to the memory of all those who had fought
against fascism.
13. In drafting the resolution, the sponsors had
endeavoured to make it as balanced as possible and
ensure that it was acceptable to all delegations. He
noted several revisions to the text: in paragraph 24, the
words “and non-governmental organizations” had been
deleted; and a new paragraph 24 bis had been added,
reading: “Expresses also its appreciation to
representatives of civil society for their contribution to
the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”.
14. Drawing attention to statements by certain
delegations which his delegation found fundamentally
objectionable, such as the argument that the victory
over fascism in the Second World War had nothing to
do with universal human rights standards and that the
glorification of Nazism and propagation of racist views
were no more or less than realization of the right to
free expression, he pointed out that such views could
never have been uttered in the halls of the United
Nations some 20 or 30 years earlier and deeply
regretted the need to utter them today, on the sixty-fifth
anniversary of that victory, of the founding of the
United Nations and of the establishment of the
Nuremberg Tribunal. He expressed the hope that the
draft resolution would receive the widest possible
support from States Members, thereby ensuring that it
made a genuine contribution to the cause of
eliminating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance.
15. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
Iraq had joined as sponsors of the draft resolution as
orally revised.
16. Ms. Kolontai (Belarus) said that, as one of the
principal sponsors of the draft resolution, her
delegation fully supported its underlying ideas and
concerns and considered its adoption particularly
apposite in 2010, which had been proclaimed the
International Year of Youth, as a strong message to
young people. Recalling the events held in May 2010
by the General Assembly to mark the sixty-fifth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War and
commemorate its victims, she said that Belarus, whichA/C.3/65/SR.46
10-64070 4
had lost nearly one third of its population during those
terrible years, knew only too well the consequences to
which the ideology of racial supremacy could lead and
therefore called upon all States Members of the
Organization to join it in supporting the draft
resolution.
17. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting on behalf of the European
Union; the candidate countries Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the stabilization and
association process countries Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Montenegro; and, in addition,
Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said
that neo-Nazism was an abhorrent manifestation of
racism that existed in many societies of the European
Union, as well as in those of the main sponsors of the
draft resolution. Neo-Nazism was a threat that should
be tackled through comprehensive national, regional
and international measures to combat racism, including
activities to implement the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
The fight against racism, including neo-Nazism, was a
common priority of all Member States and should not
be used for extraneous purposes. The European Union
had expressed readiness to contribute to the draft
resolution and had proposed several amendments.
Although paragraph 21 had been improved by
referencing the entire Convention instead of a single
article, the rest of its suggestions had not been taken
into consideration. The Union remained concerned
about the approach taken to the draft resolution,
including with regard to the issue of freedom of
expression.
18. Specifically, in its selective approach, the draft
resolution deflected attention from human rights
concerns related to racism, in particular racist and
xenophobic violence, despite the Union’s requests for a
more comprehensive, objective and legally appropriate
approach. In addition, the draft resolution should have
better reflected the principle that any efforts to combat
racism and intolerance must not undermine human
rights as defined by international law. The sponsors’
reluctance to address the inaccurate citations of the
Judgement of the Nuremberg Tribunal was also
questionable, as the European Union had repeatedly
proposed a precise quotation. Finally, the request for a
report on the implementation of the draft resolution
from the Special Rapporteur on Contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance undermined the comprehensive mandate
and adequate reporting system that had already been
established, which required the Special Rapporteur to
report regularly to the Human Rights Council and the
General Assembly. For those reasons, the European
Union would abstain from voting on the draft
resolution, but remained willing to work on a
resolution that would make a strong contribution to
combating racism and xenophobia.
19. Ms. Phipps (United States), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that her
delegation shared the revulsion expressed by fellow
Committee members at the promotion of Nazi
ideology. The United States Government had been a
strong supporter of United Nations efforts to remember
the Holocaust and condemned all forms of religious
intolerance. However, her delegation remained
concerned that the draft resolution, as in past years,
failed to distinguish between actions and statements.
While the increase in racist incidents, including on the
Internet, was a matter of concern, curtailing expression
was not an appropriate or effective means of combating
racism. Freedom of speech and freedom of expression
should be protected, even when they were used to
express hate. The United States Government had
affirmed that conviction by making a reservation to
article 4 of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
Robust legal protections against discrimination and
hate crimes, Government outreach to minority religious
groups and the defence of both freedom of religion and
freedom of expression were the best antidote to
intolerance, not the criminalization of offensive
speech. Her delegation would therefore vote against the
draft resolution.
20. At the request of the delegation of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.50.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,A/C.3/65/SR.46
5 10-64070
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Comoros, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
21. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.50 was adopted by
118 votes to 1, with 55 abstentions.
22. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) said that his delegation
regretted that consultations on the text had been limited
and that the sponsors had not taken into account the
concerns of many delegations, including his own. His
delegation had abstained from voting as it found that
the draft resolution was selective in its references to
types of contemporary racism and geographic regions.
The practices that fuelled racism were not limited to a
single historical context; they had existed at all times.
In addition, the concerns raised in the draft resolution
would have been more appropriately addressed in
document A/C.3/65/L.60, which was the comprehensive
draft resolution on the elimination of all forms of
racism.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.29/Rev.1: Extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions
23. Ms. Fröberg (Finland), speaking on behalf of the
five Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden) and the other sponsors,
introduced the draft resolution. New Zealand, San
Marino and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had
joined the sponsors. Although consensus had been
reached on certain provisions of the draft resolution, it
had not been possible to reach consensus on the
inclusion of a reference to sexual orientation.
24. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Colombia, Dominican Republic, Republic of
Korea, Timor-Leste and Ukraine had also joined the
sponsors.
Proposed amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/L.29/Rev.1,
contained in document A/C.3/65/L.65
25. The Chair said that the proposed amendment
contained no programme budget implications.
26. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin), speaking on behalf of
the Group of African States, introduced the proposed
amendment, which was also sponsored by the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Group
of Arab States. The amendment would ensure that the
draft resolution addressed all forms of discrimination.
Certain forms of discrimination, including on the basis
of the undefined and controversial notion of sexual
orientation, should not be highlighted at the expense of
others. That notion had no legal basis in international
human rights instruments. Moreover, many moreA/C.3/65/SR.46
10-64070 6
people were victims of discrimination on the basis of,
inter alia, colour, race and gender. Comprehensiveness
rather than selectivity was the key to ensuring the
commitment of the international community to
combating extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions on any basis.
27. The sponsors had, however, rejected language
that would have allowed many more Member States to
support or even sponsor the draft resolution. Member
States were therefore urged to approve the proposed
amendment with a view to ensuring that the draft
resolution was supported by as many delegations as
possible. Moreover, if the international community
wished to discuss sexual orientation, it must address
that issue directly, in an agreed format and on another
occasion.
28. Ms. Fröberg (Finland) said that the proposed
amendment was unacceptable and requested that a
recorded vote should be taken.
29. Ms. Bouhamidi (Morocco), speaking on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, said that
it was alarming that certain States, while ignoring
intolerance and discrimination on the basis of, inter
alia, race, gender, colour and religion, were attempting
to highlight controversial and undefined notions and
draw attention to certain persons on the grounds of
their sexual interests and behaviour. The concept of
sexual orientation had no basis in, and should not be
linked to, existing international human rights
instruments. The international community must avoid
selectivity in the field of human rights, which would
set a dangerous precedent and promote the interests of
particular groups over others. Efforts must be made to
combat attempts to create new rights or standards by
misinterpreting the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and international treaties, claiming that they
addressed notions that had neither been articulated nor
agreed on by the signatories to those instruments. All
Member States were urged to continue to devote
special attention and resources to the protection of the
family, which was the natural and fundamental group
unit of society, as affirmed by the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
30. Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden) said that her country
strongly objected to the proposal to amend the draft
resolution by deleting the term “sexual orientation”.
Sexual orientation was frequently the motive for
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and the
deletion of that term would be tantamount to the
Committee ignoring or condoning the execution of
persons on that basis. Adoption of the proposed
amendment would discourage some States from
investigating certain executions or prosecuting the
perpetrators of those crimes. The Committee had not
voiced concerns about other undefined notions
contained in paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, which,
inter alia, listed other groups and persons who were
particularly at risk. It was unacceptable that the
international community should deny certain
individuals their right to life and disregard the plight of
the vulnerable. Sweden would therefore vote against
the proposed amendment.
31. Ms. Chuard (Switzerland) said that safeguarding
the rights of lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transsexuals
was a priority for her country. Attention should be
drawn to all those who were particularly at risk of
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary execution and, in
that connection, the draft resolution’s reference to
sexual orientation was of particular importance.
Discrimination against lesbians, gays, bisexuals and
transsexuals must not be ignored. The world was
witnessing an increase in the frequency of homophobic
violence and the number of people killed on the basis
of their sexual orientation had reached new levels. As a
traditional sponsor of the resolution, the Swiss
delegation would vote against the proposed amendment
and urged other Member States to do so.
32. Ms. Fröberg (Finland) said that the draft
resolution had contained a reference to sexual
orientation for over a decade with a view to raising
awareness among States of the need to protect persons
from extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions on
that basis. Certain individuals were still at risk of
execution because of their sexual orientation, as
highlighted by the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions in his reports,
statements and appeals to Member States. Although the
expression “discriminatory reasons on any basis” in the
proposed amendment would automatically include
sexual orientation, that fact needed to be explicitly
mentioned, just as the Committee specifically
mentioned racially motivated killings or killings of
persons belonging to ethnic, national, religious or
linguistic minorities. Member States were therefore
urged to vote against the proposed amendment.
33. Ms. Barbaglia (United Kingdom) said that the
draft resolution referred to the need for prompt andA/C.3/65/SR.46
7 10-64070
thorough investigation of all killings, including on the
basis of sexual orientation, because those killings
continued to be a cause for concern. The draft
resolution listed particular categories of abhorrent
killings that had been identified by the Special
Rapporteur in his reports. Although that list was not
meant to be exhaustive, the draft resolution should aim
to identify all those who were particularly at risk and
should call for appropriate action to be taken. To
accept the amendment would constitute an affront to
equality and respect for human dignity and would
mean accepting that certain individuals did not deserve
the same protection as others. That was unacceptable
and the United Kingdom would therefore vote against
the amendment.
34. Ms. Flood-Beaubrun (Saint Lucia) said that her
country was committed to carrying out prompt and
impartial investigations of killings and was striving to
ensure that all persons enjoyed equal rights and
protection under the law. Specific groups should not be
listed: lists were not exhaustive, risked being
misinterpreted and could be manipulated to undermine
justice. It was, moreover, imperative that the terms
used in the draft resolution were clear and unequivocal
so as to ensure that it guaranteed equality before the
law and could not be manipulated to provide
justification for discrimination or violence. Saint Lucia
would vote in favour of the proposed amendment
because it would make the draft resolution more
comprehensive and ensure that it offered protection to
all groups and individuals.
35. Mr. Baños (United States of America) said that
his country strongly opposed the amendment. It was
utterly spurious to claim that condemnation of the
killing of persons because of their sexual orientation
would create new rights or reinterpret the right to life.
The draft resolution referred to 17 groups; highlighting
certain abhorrent practices would not make it less
inclusive. The United States urged all States to vote
against the proposed amendment.
36. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.29/Rev.1,
contained in document A/C.3/65/L.65.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Belarus,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Colombia, Fiji, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tuvalu, Vanuatu.
37. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.29/Rev.1 contained in document
A/C.3/65/L.65 was adopted by 79 votes to 70, with
17 abstentions.A/C.3/65/SR.46
10-64070 8
38. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) in explanation of vote after
the voting, said that, by adopting the amendment, the
United Nations had failed to send a positive message to
those striving to combat discrimination and violence.
39. Mr. Govender (South Africa) said that his
country had voted in favour of the amendment because
of its belief in the principle of non-discrimination on
any grounds, including on the basis of sexual
orientation. South Africa believed that the international
human rights system should define sexual orientation
and gender identity and establish their parameters
under international human rights law. Until formal
open-ended intergovernmental dialogue on that issue
took place at the United Nations level, disputes
between Member States were likely to continue.
40. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), in explanation of
vote after the voting, said that the amendment was
sufficiently comprehensive and underlined the fact that
the draft resolution would continue to address all
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,
including on the basis of sexual orientation.
41. Ms. Bouhamdi (Morocco) said that the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Group
of Arab States would join the consensus on the draft
resolution as amended.
42. The Chair said that, in accordance with rule 130
of the rules of procedure, a recorded vote would be
taken on draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.29/Rev.1, as
amended.
43. Ms. Fröberg (Finland) drew attention to the
broad consensus that existed on the importance of the
issue of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions.
Her delegation urged all Member States to vote in
favour of the draft resolution.
44. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin), speaking on behalf of
the Group of African States, said that the Group would
support the draft resolution.
45. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that India, Namibia and Senegal had joined the
sponsors of the draft resolution.
46. Mr. Ali (Sudan), speaking in explanation of vote
before the voting, reiterated his delegation’s refusal to
accept the imposition by certain delegations of so-
called humanitarian concepts not agreed upon
internationally within the context of resolutions on
crucial matters. Sudan’s abstention from the vote did
not negate its conviction on the importance of the
issues addressed in the draft resolution, such as
protection of human rights, the right to life and
protection of the individual, all of which were
enshrined in its Constitution and laws. His country also
firmly believed that impunity must be combated and
human rights violators prosecuted, obligations that fell
to States in accordance with their domestic and
international commitments. Nevertheless, the reference
in paragraph 10 to the International Criminal Court
was not justified. That institution was not universally
accepted and therefore States not parties to the Rome
Statute were under no obligation to recognize it or
abide by its rulings. Moreover, the role and activities of
the Court, which had been established only a decade
earlier, had been greatly exaggerated.
47. The fears of many States since the adoption of the
Rome Statute regarding the role of the Security
Council and its relationship to the Court had been
confirmed, given the Court’s conduct in recent years,
which proved that it was moving in the direction of
politicizing justice. His delegation therefore rejected
paragraph 10 and endorsed the positions of States and
regional organizations that refused the Court’s
selectivity and politicization of justice.
48. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.29/Rev.1 as amended.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,A/C.3/65/SR.46
9 10-64070
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Burkina Faso, Israel, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Marshall Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Turkey,
Tuvalu, United States of America, Zimbabwe.
49. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.29/Rev.1, as
amended, was adopted by 165 votes to none, with
10 abstentions.
50. Mr. Sambou (France), speaking in explanation of
vote after the voting, expressed regret that the General
Assembly had, contrary to past practice, foregone
mention of sexual orientation as a basis for targeting in
the commission of extrajudicial, arbitrary and summary
executions. Since 1999, the Special Rapporteurs had
consistently and explicitly made reference to that
category of persons as being particularly vulnerable to
such crimes.
51. Mr. Ghanei (Islamic Republic of Iran), speaking
in explanation of vote after the voting, said that while
his country condemned extrajudicial, summary and
arbitrary executions and had supported the draft
resolution as amended, it had reservations with regard
to paragraph 5, which did not reflect the universal
responsibility of States to prevent such executions. His
delegation had expected the text to remind all States of
their obligations in that regard by complying with their
obligations under relevant human rights instruments,
but any particular reference in the draft resolution to
States that had retained the death penalty would
undermine that universal responsibility.
52. Mr. Baños (United States of America), speaking
in explanation of vote after the voting, said that his
delegation had been unable to vote for the draft
resolution as a whole due to concerns with the
language used, although it agreed with much of what
the resolution contained. It was regrettable that the
reference in the draft resolution to extrajudicial
executions targeting the lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender community in particular had not survived
an unfriendly amendment, and that the Committee had
been unable to bring itself to condemn killings
targeting individuals because of their sexual
orientation. Moreover, the text obscured the
fundamental point that the unlawful killings of
individuals by Governments were regulated by two
distinct bodies of law, namely, international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. As
worded, the resolution contributed to legal uncertainty
about how those important bodies of law applied to an
array of factual circumstances.
53. Ms. Wilson (Jamaica), speaking in explanation of
vote after the voting, expressed disappointment that
paragraph 5 had not been further amended, as the
manner in which that paragraph had been drafted
implied that the use of the death penalty automatically
amounted to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
execution, an interpretation that Jamaica did not share.
Moreover, her delegation did not support the singling
out of States that retained the penalty, which failed to
reflect the obligations of all States.
54. With regard to paragraph 6 (b), its focus should
have been the prevention of extrajudicial, summary and
arbitrary killings and other discrimination against all
persons, rather than including what amounted to a
non-exhaustive “shopping list” of categories; indeed,
several categories of vulnerable persons had not been
included. Her country hoped that those concerns would
be taken into account in future negotiations.
55. Mr. Michelsen (Norway), speaking in
explanation of vote after the voting, said that hisA/C.3/65/SR.46
10-64070 10
delegation deeply regretted the adoption of the
amendment to paragraph 6 (b), which deleted the
reference to sexual orientation — a basis for particular
vulnerability to extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary
executions identified by the Special Rapporteurs since
1999 — but supported the resolution as a whole.
56. Ms. Barbaglia (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland), delivering a general statement
after voting, reiterated her Government’s support for
the work of the Special Rapporteur with a view to
eliminating the abhorrent practice of extrajudicial,
summary and arbitrary executions and combating
impunity. Where the resolution referred to State
obligations, her Government understood them to be
subject to jurisdictional limitations on States’
obligations in international human rights law.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.37: Elimination of
discrimination against persons affected by leprosy
and their family members
57. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
58. Mr. Kimura (Japan) said that since the initial
introduction of draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.37,
Afghanistan, Austria, Azerbaijan, Cuba, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Germany, Guatemala, Ireland,
Kazakhstan, Madagascar, Philippines, Mauritius,
Thailand, Republic of Korea and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela had joined the list of sponsors.
Before taking action on the draft resolution, he said
that a technical correction should be made to
preambular paragraph 3: the word “basic” before
“human rights” should be deleted.
59. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Angola, Bangladesh, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, France, Georgia,
Guyana, Haiti, Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Nigeria, Paraguay, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Saint Lucia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine and
Yemen had joined the list of sponsors.
60. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.37 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.38: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
61. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
62. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that Burkina Faso, Ghana,
India, Nigeria and Togo had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution. The fact that the draft resolution had
86 sponsors proved that the international community
acknowledged the challenges and opportunities
globalization presented. Neither the unequal
distribution of its benefits nor the impact of its
challenges favoured developing countries, which in
turn affected their ability to promote and protect
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
63. The draft resolution emphasized the need to
address some of the crucial challenges posed by
globalization to developing countries in order to
minimize their impact on national capacities to
promote and protect all human rights. It also
highlighted the importance of ensuring even and fair
distribution of the benefits of globalization.
Unfortunately, certain delegations had categorically
refused to engage in a constructive dialogue with the
sponsors, but the sponsors looked forward to greater
engagement in future consultations.
64. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Liberia had joined the sponsors.
65. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking in explanation
of vote before voting on behalf of the European Union,
the candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Iceland, the
Countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, and the EFTA country
Norway, member of the European Economic Area, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, and
Georgia, said that the European Union could not
support the draft resolution, which, regrettably,
remained the same as the previous year’s draft. Dealing
with the effects of globalization — a multidimensional
phenomenon — was high on the agenda of the
European Union. While the challenges faced in the
world were increasingly of a global nature,
globalization could also offer means to tackle some of
the most acute problems as well as great opportunities
for stimulating growth and prosperity worldwide, thus
contributing to the promotion and protection of human
rights.
66. The European Union acknowledged that
globalization could have an impact on the fullA/C.3/65/SR.46
11 10-64070
enjoyment of human rights; however, the draft
resolution inaccurately stated that globalization
adversely affected the enjoyment of all rights, a
generalization the European Union could not subscribe
to. The relationship between human rights and
globalization — which in certain instances could be a
positive one — must be assessed on a case-by-case
basis.
67. Mr. Sellos (Brazil), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that his delegation would
support the draft resolution. Brazil welcomed the focus
in that year’s resolution on the negative impact of the
global economic and financial crises on the universal
realization and effective enjoyment of human rights, as
well as the call for States and the international
community to alleviate that impact. Stressing that
efforts to realize the full enjoyment of human rights in
the context of globalization must be in line with
international human rights law, he reiterated that it was
the duty of all States to promote and protect all human
rights and fundamental freedoms regardless of their
political, economic and cultural systems.
68. At the request of the delegation of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.38.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
None.
69. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.38 was adopted by
122 votes to 53, with no abstentions.
70. Mr. Tagle (Chile), speaking in explanation of
vote after the voting, said that his delegation had
supported the draft resolution because it had included
elements that were important to Chile, among them the
recognition that globalization, while it also provided
opportunities, presented challenges to the exercise of
economic and social rights, a reality that must be
addressed.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.