United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.44
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
28 December 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-60497 (E)
*1260497*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 44th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 26 November 2012, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 103: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 104: International drug control (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)A/C.3/67/SR.44
12-60497 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.37,
A/C.3/67/L.38 and A/C.3/67/L.53)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.37: Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
2. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, said that China had
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution, the aim of
which was to recognize that stronger international
coordination was essential to the promotion of human
rights. She read out oral revisions to paragraph 12. The
first word, “Welcomes”, should be replaced with
“Recalls”, and the words “as decided in resolution
19/33 of the Council” should be added to the end of the
paragraph. The members of the Non-Aligned
Movement invited all delegations to approve it by
consensus.
3. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that El Salvador had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution, as orally revised.
4. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.37, as orally revised,
was adopted.
5. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that her
delegation was pleased to join the consensus on the
draft resolution. While it acknowledged the existence
of regional crises and price volatility, however, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) had made it clear that the current
situation did not constitute a global food crisis. The
references to such a crisis in the text were therefore
inaccurate.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.38: Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures
6. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
7. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, reiterated its
opposition to unilateral coercive measures, in
particular against developing countries. Under no
circumstances should a people be deprived of its means
of subsistence and development, and States should
refrain from violating international law and the Charter
of the United Nations. The Non-Aligned Movement
invited all delegations to vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
8. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that China had joined the sponsors.
9. The Chair said that a recorded vote had been
requested.
10. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) asked which
delegation had requested the recorded vote.
11. The Chair said that the vote had been requested
by the delegation of the United States of America.
12. Ms. Robl (United States of America), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
draft resolution had no basis in international law,
challenged States’ sovereign right freely to conduct
their economic relations and protect their interests,
including in the area of national security, and
attempted to undermine the international community’s
ability to respond to acts which ran counter to
international norms. Her Government was not alone in
viewing unilateral and multilateral sanctions as a
means of achieving its legitimate objectives.
13. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.38.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,A/C.3/67/SR.44
3 12-60497
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Malawi.
14. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.38 was adopted by
115 votes to 52, with 2 abstentions.1
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.53: International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
15. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
16. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Andorra, Armenia, Bolivia (the Plurinational State
of), Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Haiti,
Honduras, Madagascar, Mauritania, Nigeria, Panama,
__________________
1 The delegations of Afghanistan, Malawi, the Sudan and
Zambia subsequently informed the Committee that they
had intended to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Peru, Paraguay, Serbia, Somalia and Tunisia had joined
the sponsors of the draft resolution.
17. Ms. Perceval (Argentina), speaking on behalf of
the main sponsors, said that Azerbaijan, Belize,
Cameroon, Canada, Eritrea, Gabon, Grenada, India,
Kazakhstan, Mali, Mongolia, New Zealand, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Swaziland, Uganda and
Zambia had joined the sponsors. Her delegation trusted
that more Member States would adhere to the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the adoption of
which had filled a gap in international human rights
law and had made it mandatory for States to investigate
those responsible.
18. The draft resolution recalled that no one should
be held in secret detention, recognized the importance
of the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance and took note of the
general comments of the Working Group on Enforced
or Involuntary Disappearances.
19. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Comoros, Grenada, Nicaragua, Niger and Togo
had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
20. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.53 was adopted.
Agenda item 103: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.15/Rev.1: Strengthening the
United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice
programme, in particular its technical cooperation
capacity
21. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
22. Mr. Mogini (Italy) said that Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Dominica, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia, Mongolia,A/C.3/67/SR.44
12-60497 4
Montenegro, Namibia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan,
Spain, the Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
the United States of America and Uruguay had joined
the sponsors of the draft resolution.
23. Since crime impacted all Member States, a
common response was needed. Because transnational
organized crime operated as a business, curbing its
financial power would affect its raison d’être. A lack of
international cooperation in attacking criminal assets
would lead to the contamination of vulnerable
economic systems by crime. The purposes of the
resolution were to build consensus on the fight against
organized crime through the United Nations; to
promote the implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the Protocols thereto; and to confirm the Member
States’ support for technical assistance from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
24. As a result of informal consultations, language on
asset recovery, the implementation of the Global Plan
of Action on Trafficking in Persons and support for the
United Nations Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking
in Persons, especially Women and Children,
international cooperation against trafficking in cultural
property, capacity-building to combat environmental
crimes, crime prevention and social development, the
adoption of the United Nations Principles and
Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice
Systems and the enhancement of UNODC technical
assistance in forensic science had been incorporated in
the text.
25. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Bangladesh, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Burundi, Indonesia, Kuwait, Mauritania,
Niger, Sierra Leone, Uganda and the United Republic
of Tanzania had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
26. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.15/Rev.1 was adopted.
27. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her delegation had
supported the consensus on the draft resolution because
it believed that the fight against transnational
organized crime should be conducted in line with the
principles of international cooperation and respect for
State sovereignty. It nevertheless expressed
reservations about certain paragraphs which contained
inaccurate claims.
28. Although transnational organized crime
negatively affected human rights, the rule of law and
national stability, it had no impact on international
peace and security. The claim in the sixteenth
preambular paragraph that it had such an impact ran
counter to the resolutions of the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice.
29. Her delegation was also concerned by the
eighteenth preambular paragraph, in which a direct link
was made between arms trafficking, transnational
organized crime and other criminal activities, including
terrorism. It did not recognize the existence of
systematic links between crimes; to make such links
was to be unaware of the universal human rights
principles of due process and the presumption of
innocence. Specifically, the links between terrorism
and transnational organized crime were neither
automatic nor permanent, but had varying causes
which should be analyzed on a case-by-case basis.
30. It was claimed in the nineteenth preambular
paragraph that States’ actions against terrorism were a
common and shared responsibility. No such
responsibility, however, was mentioned in the
international or regional instruments relating to the
fight against terrorism, nor was it possible in the
absence of an internationally agreed definition of
terrorism.
31. Her Government had ratified international
instruments through which it had made commitments
relating to reciprocal legal assistance and the
extradition of terrorists. It considered, however, that
the nineteenth preambular paragraph was a distortion
of the reference in the 2005 Bangkok Declaration to
better cooperation against crime in a “spirit of common
and shared responsibility”. That Declaration, however,
was non-binding and did not establish shared
responsibility.
32. Her delegation felt that terrorism should be
addressed by the Sixth Committee and that the
references to it exceeded the scope of the draft
resolution. The UNODC terrorism mandate was limited
to helping States implement legal instruments.A/C.3/67/SR.44
5 12-60497
33. Mr. Dempsey (Canada) said that the international
community should fight irresponsible trading in arms
and their conversion to illicit uses, while
acknowledging the legitimate use of weapons in sport
shooting, hunting and collecting. Since there were
legitimate uses of arms, there was also a legitimate
trade in them.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.17/Rev.2: United Nations
African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders
34. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, said that the
request in paragraph 17 of the draft resolution for the
Secretary-General to continue making proposals for
additional staff would be addressed in the context of
the budget proposals and would be reviewed by the
intergovernmental bodies. The adoption of the draft
resolution would not, therefore, entail additional
appropriations under the programme budget for 2012-
2013.
35. Ms. Kafeero (Uganda), speaking on behalf of the
African Group, said that Grenada, New Zealand, Saint
Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines had joined
the sponsors of the draft resolution.
36. African economies were under attack from
cybercrime, illicit trafficking in cultural property, drug
trafficking, money laundering and piracy. Crime was a
major obstacle to sustainable development, and
investment in its prevention was a positive step.
37. The United Nations African Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders
had been instrumental in carrying out research on
community correction techniques to relieve congestion
in prisons. It had provided technical assistance in
criminal justice systems, including training in evidence
collection, and the enactment of legislation to combat
trafficking in persons and drugs. It had carried out
studies of the drug situation in Africa, a situation
which could undo all the work carried out in other
regions if left unresolved. It had raised awareness of
the fight against cybercriminals and had carried out
capacity-building in the areas of juvenile justice,
childcare and child protection. It needed the
cooperation and assistance of its members to carry out
its work, which was essential to crime prevention and
beneficial to the international community.
38. The text of the draft resolution was the result of
consultations with other regional groups and had met
the expectations of all concerned. A major change in
the revised version was the decision not to request
additional financial resources, since the Institute was
undergoing a structural review. Instead, the proposals
were focused on the Institute’s activities.
39. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.17/Rev.2 was adopted.
Agenda item 104: International drug control
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.14/Rev.2: International
cooperation against the world drug problem
40. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, said that in
paragraphs 43 and 45 of the draft resolution, the
requirements for the preparatory process for the 2016
special session of the General Assembly on the world
drug problem should be assessed when the General
Assembly decided on the preparatory work to be
undertaken. The resources required to service the
session would be reviewed in the light of the proposed
programme budgets for 2014-2015 and 2016-2017. The
adoption of the draft resolution would thus have no
programme budget implications in 2012-2013.
41. Ms. Morgan (Mexico) said that the draft
resolution established measures to address the world
drug problem and reaffirmed the international
community’s commitment to stronger cooperation. It
provided for a special session of the General Assembly
in 2016, to review progress in the Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem.
42. Albania, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Burkina Faso,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Grenada,
Greece, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Montenegro, Myanmar, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Paraguay, Peru, the Republic of Korea, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Spain,
Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the UnitedA/C.3/67/SR.44
12-60497 6
States of America had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
43. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Bahamas, Barbados, Cameroon, Croatia, Denmark,
Egypt, France, Gambia, Germany, Guyana, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, the Republic of
Moldova, Monaco, Morocco, Niger, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Suriname,
Swaziland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Uganda had joined the sponsors.
44. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.14/Rev.2 was adopted.
45. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her delegation had
joined the consensus on the draft resolution but wished
to point out that the use of drugs and illicit drugs,
referred to in the text, was not banned under the 1961
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. The Convention
recognized both the medical use of narcotic drugs and
the need to combat their abuse, which required
coordinated and universal action. The references to
“illicit drugs” in the draft resolution thus required
clarification: it was the demand for drugs for
non-medical purposes which was illicit, not the drugs
themselves.
46. Her delegation was concerned by the precedence
given in the draft resolution to the World Drug Report
over the three binding international Conventions in the
area, which constituted the framework for the fight
against drugs.
47. Linguistic precision was essential in diplomacy,
since the use of incorrect terms caused confusion. Her
delegation hoped that the matter would be addressed at
the next session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
and the General Assembly. It would be useful to have a
clear picture before the 2016 special session on the
world drug problem.
48. Her delegation reiterated its opposition to the
claim in paragraphs 21 and 22 that automatic links
existed between crimes. That claim demonstrated an
ignorance of the universally recognized principles of
due process and the presumption of innocence.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.22/Rev.1: Supporting
efforts to end obstetric fistula
49. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
50. Ms. Sarr (Senegal), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the African Group, said that
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cambodia, Canada,
Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Poland, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) had joined the sponsors.
51. More than 3 million women and girls suffered
from obstetric fistula and associated stigma and
discrimination, mainly in developing countries, which
in turn led to deeper poverty, low-self esteem, and in
some cases, suicide. Indeed, the condition, which
stemmed from prolonged obstructed labour and was
almost entirely preventable with the proper care, was
among the leading causes of maternal mortality in the
developing world. The draft resolution was about
saving the lives of women and girls by calling for
renewed focus on the matter. It reflected the
recommendations in the report of the Secretary-
General (A/67/258) on what must be done at the
national, regional and international levels to prevent
obstetric fistula and end maternal mortality and
morbidity. If Millennium Development Goal 5
(improve maternal health) was to be achieved, the
international community must enhance access to
affordable, comprehensive health care services to meet
the needs of women and girls. The Third Committee
and General Assembly must speak out and show
commitment to help save those lives.
52. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Malta and Monaco had joined the sponsors.A/C.3/67/SR.44
7 12-60497
53. Mr. López (Peru) said that his Government
would consider application of the provisions of the
draft resolution insofar as they were in line with its
Constitution and the international obligations from
human rights treaties to which Peru was a party. Its
Constitution recognized the right to life for all persons
from the time of conception, and abortion was
considered a criminal offence in its criminal code,
except on therapeutic grounds. His country’s position
on sexual and reproductive rights had been stated
clearly at the 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development and the 1995 Fourth
World Conference on Women.
54. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that the
draft resolution acknowledged that the protection of
women’s reproductive rights played a key role in
combating obstetric fistula. That was key to helping
women to achieve the highest available standard of
reproductive health. It was only by protecting sexual
and reproductive health and rights that safe and healthy
environments could be offered to women.
Reproductive rights, as described in the Programme of
Action agreed at the 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development, and in many resolutions
since, provided the foundation for global efforts, and
State compliance with that programme of action was
crucial. Her delegation strongly supported the draft
resolution and would continue to foster implementation
of the Programme of Action. Lastly, she noted that her
Government understood child marriage to signify
forced and early marriage.
55. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.22/Rev.1 was adopted.
56. Mr. Staur (Denmark), speaking on behalf of the
Nordic countries, said that he welcomed the adoption
of the draft resolution, as obstetric fistula caused
physical and social harm and was preventable. The
Nordic countries remained strongly committed to
supporting efforts to end obstetric fistula, improving
maternal health and reducing maternal mortality as a
top priority in its development cooperation and the
reason for its strong support of the United Nations
Population Fund. It was welcome that the resolution
focused on ensuring universal access to the services
needed by the women and girls at risk of or suffering
from that condition, noting that it was also the result of
socio-economic and gender inequalities and the lack of
respect for the human rights of women and girls. A
holistic and human-rights based approach must thus be
adopted to tackle the root causes of obstetric fistula.
57. He welcomed the emphasis on the reproductive
rights of women and girls, as part of a comprehensive
prevention and care strategy, since women should have
the right to decide on the number, spacing and timing
of their children. Information and education were key
to addressing that scourge. The promotion and
protection of women’s reproductive rights also helped
provide the building blocks for achieving women’s
empowerment and gender equality, and were thus at the
core of human development.
58. Mr. Wylie (Observer for the Holy See) said that
while the resolution contained important elements, his
delegation reaffirmed its reservations to any reference
to “gender”, “sexual and reproductive health”, and
especially to “reproductive rights”, which were clearly
set out in the 1994 report of the International
Conference on Population and Development and the
1995 report of the Fourth World Conference on
Women. He recalled that the 1994 report affirmed that
no new human rights were created by that terminology,
and abortion was never to be considered a means for
family planning. That issue was to be determined not
internationally, but in accordance with national
legislation. The terms “sexual and reproductive health”
and particularly “reproductive rights” should never be
understood to include access to abortion or to
abortifacients.
59. It was important to recall that each child’s right to
integral human development, including education, was
guided by the provisions of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. States must uphold the rights and
responsibilities of parents for the upbringing and
education of their children, in order to advance the best
interests of the child’s individual, cultural and spiritual
development. Lastly, his delegation understood
“gender” to mean male or female, in accordance with
the general and historical usage of the term.
60. Mr. Mosot (Kenya) said that he welcomed the
adoption of the resolution by consensus, as it
recognized the links between obstetric fistula and
poverty, malnutrition, early childbearing and gender
discrimination. Many cases were due inter alia to a
lack of health facilities and trained medical personnel,
particularly in rural areas. The technology, momentum
and resources to address the scourge of obstetric fistula
were there; it was now a matter of making concerted
efforts to address and curb the condition as a priority.A/C.3/67/SR.44
12-60497 8
61. For its part, Kenya had made investments to
develop its health system, but its health infrastructure
needed to be strengthened and the drainage of health
service workers to developed countries addressed. The
only way for women and girls to enjoy the highest
health standards was for obstetric fistula to be
recognized as a priority by the international
community. In that respect, technical and financial
support must be stepped up. Action was also needed to
deal with maternal, newborn and child health through
pre- and post-natal care, and obstetric and newborn
care. Health systems must be strengthened, education
encouraged and awareness raised. He hoped that
sufficient funds could be mobilized to enable
affordable health care and to prevent the occurrence of
obstetric fistula.
62. Mr. Ruidiaz (Chile) said that his delegation had
joined consensus on the draft resolution, but noted that
Chile’s Constitution clearly stated that life was
protected from conception to death, and no part of the
draft resolution could be understood or interpreted as a
direct or indirect acceptance of abortion, as that would
run counter to its domestic legislation.
63. His Government would continue to address the
serious problem of obstetric fistula in the future in a
constructive way in order to put an end to that scourge.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.