United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.28
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
19 November 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-56724 (E)
*0756724*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 28th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 29 October 2007, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.28
07-56724 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/62/36, 369 and 464)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/62/183, 207, 212, 214,
218, 222, 225, 227, 254, 255, 265, 280, 286-9,
293, 298, 304 and 317; A/C.3/62/3)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/62/213, 223, 263-4, 275, 313, 318, 354 and
498; A/C.3/62/4)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (continued) (A/62/230)
1. Mr. Nowak (Special Rapporteur on torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment) said that during his visits to Member
States he had been struck by the lack of accountability
for perpetrators of torture, and he stressed the need for
the authorities concerned to carry out effective and
independent investigations of allegations of torture.
Often complainants, especially those still detained, had
difficulty producing evidence of their allegations, with
the end result that even credible complaints were not
effectively investigated.
2. In that context, he underscored the need for
expert medical examinations of complainants, but said
that regrettably there were frequently no records of
medical examinations; access to medical care was at
the discretion of the authorities and was usually
refused or simply not available due to lack of
resources. In addition, there could be long delays
between an alleged incident of torture and a medical
examination, during which any marks or wounds could
heal, and he stressed that the mere absence of physical
evidence of ill-treatment did not prove that torture had
not taken place. He noted that during his visits to
Member States he had been assisted by independent
medical experts qualified to document and assess
injuries, in accordance with the Istanbul Protocol.
3. One of the most common obstacles to respect for
human dignity and the prevention of torture and ill-
treatment was overcrowding in places of detention,
which strained infrastructure and led to a decline in
conditions. Several international and regional human
rights mechanisms had found that poor conditions of
detention could constitute inhuman and degrading
treatment. The key factor in overcrowding was the use
of pretrial detention, even for non-violent or minor
offences. Moreover, in many countries, criminal law
focused on lengthy prison terms as the only form of
punishment, even for relatively minor crimes.
4. Avoiding deprivation of liberty was one of the
most effective safeguards against torture and
ill-treatment. It was therefore crucial that criminal
justice systems should be reformed; minor offences
should be decriminalized and, even for criminal cases,
there should be alternatives to pretrial detention as well
as non-custodial sentences for certain offences. All
stakeholders in the criminal justice system should be
involved in reform, which should be guided by such
international norms as the suggested alternatives to
detention and information on best practices published
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for Non-custodial Measures.
5. Since his previous report he had visited Paraguay,
Nigeria, Togo and Sri Lanka. His visit to Paraguay had
taken place from 22 to 29 November 2006. He
welcomed the fact that Paraguay had been among the
first countries to sign the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. On the basis of
meetings with Government and civil society
representatives, visits to detention centres and
interviews with detainees, he had concluded that
torture was still widely practised in Paraguay, primarily
during the first days of police custody, as a means of
obtaining confessions, and facilitated by impunity. The
situation of torture and ill-treatment in prisons had
nevertheless improved greatly, although he expressed
concern at the excessive use of isolation cells to punish
detainees and at allegations of beatings by guards. He
was reassured by the spirit of cooperation shown by the
Government of Paraguay and was confident his
recommendations would be implemented.
6. He had undertaken a mission to Nigeria from 4 to
10 March 2007, and had concluded that torture and
ill-treatment were widespread in police custody, in
particular within the Criminal Investigation
Departments. Conditions of detention in the police
cells visited were appalling. He had recommended a
number of measures to the Government. From 11 to
17 April 2007 he had undertaken a visit to Togo, whereA/C.3/62/SR.28
3 07-56724
he had found evidence of ill-treatment by law
enforcement officials, usually for the purpose of
obtaining a confession, and evidence of beatings of
detainees by prison guards and other prisoners. He was
also concerned that children were often subject to
corporal punishment. He had recommended a number
of measures to the Government.
7. He had visited Sri Lanka from 1 to 8 October
2007, and the current statement to the Committee was
the first public report on his findings. In spite of the
special challenges attributable to the long-standing
conflict in that country, the Government had generally
been able to uphold democratic principles and maintain
an independent judiciary. His visit had focused mainly
on detention in the ordinary justice system. The large
number of complaints indicated that torture was widely
practised and tended to be routine in the Terrorism
Investigation Department. He had received numerous
credible allegations of ill-treatment by the police, as
well as the army, to obtain confessions and
information, even though the 1994 Torture Act
criminalized torture. Numerous indictments had been
filed pursuant to the Act, but there had been only a few
convictions, possibly because the high minimum
sentence of seven years’ imprisonment served as a
disincentive to prosecutions. In addition, there were no
guarantees of a prompt and impartial investigation as
called for in article 12 of the Convention against
Torture, and detainees faced obstacles in filing
complaints and obtaining independent medical
examinations.
8. Conditions of detention were affected by
overcrowding and antiquated infrastructure. The
conditions in certain prisons, such as the Colombo
Remand Prison, amounted to degrading treatment.
Although conditions were better in more modern
facilities, the prison system as a whole needed
structural reform. Conditions for suspects detained in
Criminal or Terrorism Investigation Department
facilities pursuant to the Emergency Regulations were
inhuman. Despite the abolition of corporal punishment,
he continued to receive complaints of corporal
punishment in prisons, corroborated by medical
evidence. In that regard, he noted that the Government
of Sri Lanka had indicated that those complaints were
being investigated. He was engaged in an ongoing
constructive dialogue with the Government of Sri
Lanka with regard to the implementation of his
recommendations.
9. Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka) said that his
Government was fully aware of its international
obligations, and looked forward to further cooperation
with the special representative. It remained committed
to developing the national judicial and law
enforcement infrastructure necessary to comply with
the Special Rapporteur’s recommendations and ensure
implementation of its zero tolerance policy for torture.
It recognized the need to ensure more comprehensive
investigations of allegations of torture.
10. He did not agree, however, that the conditions in
prisons such as Colombo Remand Prison were
degrading and stressed that the conditions in the
prisons were due to overcrowding caused by a lack of
resources. His Government was taking steps within its
resources to build new facilities and looked forward to
international assistance in that regard. It had also taken
steps to minimize contact between pretrial and
convicted detainees. Neither did he agree that torture
was widely practised; according to police statistics for
the period 2002-2006 allegations of torture represented
less than 0.02 per cent of total arrests. His Government
had established a representative high-level task force to
study the report of the Special Rapporteur, and he
looked forward to assistance from donors and the
international community with regard to policy
development. His Government was working with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights with a view to implementing the Special
Rapporteur’s recommendations.
11. Ms. Tavares (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said she agreed that credible
forensic evidence was necessary to prove torture and
thereby fight impunity and noted that forensic
medicine was an interdisciplinary field. She also
agreed that avoiding deprivation of liberty was an
important measure to prevent torture, a topic that
would no doubt be taken up by the Subcommittee on
Prevention of Torture.
12. The European Union deplored the fact that
23 countries had not complied with requests from the
Special Rapporteur to visit their countries. She asked
whether the Special Rapporteur had received any
responses since May 2006 and whether he had
considered the possibility of preparing a report on the
situation in those countries using only external sources,
as was the practice in treaty bodies. Furthermore,
noting that some States did not respond to his
communications or provide information on follow-upA/C.3/62/SR.28
07-56724 4
to his recommendations, she enquired whether the
European Union could be of any assistance.
13. Given the importance of inspection of places of
detention in preventing torture, she asked what
assistance could be provided to States in establishing
national prevention mechanisms pursuant to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture.
Finally, she requested more detailed information on the
Special Rapporteur’s future missions and wondered
what contribution the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
might make to the fight against torture.
14. Ms. Sutikno (Indonesia) welcomed the Special
Rapporteur’s recommendations concerning forensic
medical examinations and non-custodial measures. She
noted that her Government was committed to the
elimination of torture and had invited the Special
Rapporteur to visit Indonesia for a fact-finding mission
on detention centres, during which a seminar on the
Optional Protocol would be held for representatives of
her Government and civil society. She expected that
Indonesia would ratify the Optional Protocol in the
near future. She asked for more information on the role
that promotional activities like the seminar to be held
during his visit to Indonesia could have in preventing
torture.
15. Mr. Khanijooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran)
took note of the Special Rapporteur’s recommendation
concerning the need for technical assistance for
capacity-building in the area of forensic expertise and
said he would welcome more information on possible
methods of intergovernmental cooperation in that
regard. He also requested information on the use of
torture in the context of counter-terrorism measures,
especially the use of secret detention centres. His
delegation had taken note of the Special Rapporteur’s
views and looked forward to strengthening its
cooperation with the Special Rapporteur on mutually
agreeable terms with a view to eliminating torture.
16. Ms. Hubert (Norway) said that the medical
specializations and backgrounds of persons identified
as forensic medical experts could vary according to
country and wondered whether the Special Rapporteur
had any recommendations with regard to the
qualifications necessary for such experts. Turning to
the provisions of the Istanbul Protocol relating to
investigation and documentation procedures, she asked
whether there was any margin of discretion for the
implementation of those measures in a national
context.
17. Mr. Ke Youshang (China) said that his
Government was in the process of implementing the
recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur after
visiting the country in 2005, and had submitted
updated information in September 2006. It was untrue
that Chinese legislation did not clearly define torture as
a crime or that there was a reluctance to combat
impunity for perpetrators. His Government attached
great importance to the elimination of torture and had
adopted detailed legislative and administrative
measures to that end which were largely in conformity
with the Convention. For example, the use of violence
and ill-treatment were criminal offences. A law had
been passed in July 2006 outlawing the torture or abuse
of detainees, and on 28 October the Lawyers Act had
been adopted, which contained strong human rights
guarantees.
18. Greater efforts had been made to increase training
in human rights for law enforcement personnel and
prosecute perpetrators. His Government looked
forward to continued cooperation with the special
mechanisms of the United Nations, and he hoped that
the Special Rapporteur would carry out his mandate in
an objective and impartial manner taking into account
the difficulties faced by individual States as well as
progress made.
19. Mr. Akindele (Nigeria) said that his Government
was committed to the rule of law and was doing its
utmost within the resources available to combat torture
and impunity. The Special Rapporteur had focused on
two isolated cases of abuse of detainees awaiting trial,
and he stressed that in proven cases of abuse the guilty
police officers were dismissed. In the context of
ongoing justice system reforms, two police Inspectors-
General had been dismissed. Efforts were also under
way to reduce the number of prisoners in pretrial
detention and overhaul the prison system. His
Government would continue to take seriously any
allegation of torture and looked forward to continuing
dialogue with the Special Rapporteur, who had taken
note of the complexity of the situation in Nigeria, a
developing country with limited resources and more
than 300 ethnic groups.
20. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) welcomed the
comprehensive overview provided by the Special
Rapporteur of his mission to Sri Lanka. TheA/C.3/62/SR.28
5 07-56724
widespread use of torture was not limited to situations
arising out of the ongoing conflict, however, and he
asked whether the Special Rapporteur had any
suggestions on how to strengthen the national
prevention mechanisms with a view to combating
impunity.
21. Ms. Nyberg (Finland) requested further
elaboration on how to ensure that the absence of
physical marks was not given undue importance. She
would also welcome more examples and possible best
practices concerning the implementation of article 40,
paragraph 4, of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child regarding alternatives to detention.
22. Mr. Montwedi (South Africa) said that the report
of the Special Rapporteur would help to strengthen the
international human rights system. His Government
would welcome a visit by the Special Rapporteur. He
would appreciate the Special Rapporteur’s views on the
allegations of renditions leading to torture and in some
cases the death penalty. Renditions should be
conducted in a way that led to criminal prosecutions
and justice.
23. Mr. Abass (Iraq) reiterated his Government’s
invitation to the Special Rapporteur to visit Iraq. The
Government was currently incorporating the terms of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment into national legislation and making every
effort to combat impunity for perpetrators of torture.
24. Ms. Drescher (Canada) said that her Government
remained deeply concerned at the prevailing climate of
impunity; she called attention to the obligation to
prosecute or extradite alleged perpetrators of torture
under the Convention. She would appreciate further
elaboration on the role of United Nations bodies in
promoting access to forensic expertise.
25. Mr. Chihuailaf (Chile) said that the Special
Rapporteur should continue to meet with regional
mechanisms. His delegation took particular note of the
comments in the report concerning forensic experts,
impunity and non-custodial measures. States often
lacked the necessary resources to fund forensic
medicine. Chile therefore supported the proposal to
promote forensic capacity-building and would
welcome further details on how that could be
accomplished.
26. Mr. Peralta (Paraguay) said that his Government
would continue to work closely with the Special
Rapporteur. The procedures by the police and
prosecution services in Paraguay during criminal
investigations had improved considerably since his
visit in November 2006. New places of detention were
also being built.
27. Mr. Nowak (Special Rapporteur on torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment) commended the Government of Sri Lanka
on its cooperation. He said it was important not only to
establish facts but also to start the process of
cooperation, and recommended that international
agencies should support Governments in their efforts to
implement his recommendations. Concerning the issue
of requests for country visits, he was grateful for the
invitations extended to him. He was currently engaged
in dialogue with the Governments of Zimbabwe and
Uzbekistan and would welcome an invitation to visit
those countries.
28. With regard to assisting States in implementing
the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment or facilitating ratification, he said that his
experience with the Government of Paraguay had been
extremely positive. He had been able to work with the
Government and non-governmental organizations at a
joint seminar to establish the minimum requirements of
a national preventive mechanism. Much had been done
already to put such a mechanism in place. He hoped to
do the same in Indonesia, which had not yet ratified the
Optional Protocol. Such a mechanism must be
independent but must also receive sufficient financial
support. He called on the donor community to assist
Governments in establishing effective national
mechanisms, which implied fairly high costs.
29. Many of the preventive mechanisms provided for
in the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance were similar
to those contained in the Convention against Torture.
There should be a register of every detainee, if possible
a centralized one. Every form of enforced
disappearance and secret place of detention amounted
to inhuman or degrading treatment. If enforced
disappearance occurred over a long period, it was
tantamount to torture, even if the application of torture
could not be established.A/C.3/62/SR.28
07-56724 6
30. Regarding counter-terrorism, he remained
extremely concerned at some of the counter-terrorism
measures adopted by many countries, particularly if
terrorist suspects were held in secret places of
detention. He referred to article 17 of the International
Convention. Nevertheless, even without that article,
any secret place of detention constituted enforced
disappearance. He called on all Governments engaged
in secret detention to cease the practice and to provide
even the most high-level terrorist suspects with the
minimum standards of the rule of law.
31. Forensic medicine was indeed a broad discipline
which involved not only medical doctors but also
anthropologists and other experts. He was always
accompanied on his missions by highly qualified
forensic medical doctors, who must be able to
corroborate the claims of alleged victims of torture.
The doctors were able to determine whether injuries
were inflicted by others or self-inflicted.
32. He was grateful for the information from China
on recent developments. He would welcome the
information on new legislation in writing. He was still
awaiting a response to the allegations which he had
brought to the attention of the delegation in relation to
organ harvesting in order to include it in his
forthcoming report to the Human Rights Council. He
also thanked the representative of Nigeria for the
updated information on the release of pretrial
detainees. He would appreciate details on three
detainees for whom he had requested medical
assistance.
33. Concerning impunity in Sri Lanka, he was
concerned that people could be held for a long time in
places which were not suitable for long-term detention.
Much was being done to investigate cases. However, a
minimum sentence of seven years for persons found
guilty of torture served as a disincentive for courts to
hand down sentences. There were only three persons in
the past 13 years who had been sentenced for the
crime.
34. In response to the question regarding torture
which did not leave physical marks, psychiatrists and
forensic experts were in a position to look into long-
term post-traumatic stress disorder and other symptoms
to determine whether a person had been subjected to
torture. There was therefore a need for full access to
alleged victims of torture, in particular when they were
removed from police detention to pretrial detention.
35. He fully concurred that the allegations of the use
of torture in renditions should lead to criminal
prosecution. That was the problem with extraordinary
rendition. The purpose was not to send persons to
countries where they would be brought to justice, but
rather to send them where there were fairly harsh
interrogation methods. The way in which persons were
treated during the rendition process also violated the
prohibition of torture and ill-treatment.
36. As there were many countries which lacked
qualified forensic experts, he called on the
international community to assist States in establishing
their own independent forensic services. Concerning
the comment by Chile, he was very interested in
further cooperation with regional mechanisms, in
particular the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights and the African Commission on Human and
Peoples’ Rights.
37. Mr. Kälin (Representative of the Secretary-
General on the human rights of internally displaced
persons) said that the protection of internally displaced
persons entailed durable solutions to their
displacement, including voluntary return to their places
of origin. Some Governments, including those of
Uganda, Côte d’Ivoire and Nepal, had made
remarkable efforts towards that end. Nevertheless,
more must be done to assist returns and ensure
sustainability. In Turkey the considerable efforts to find
durable solutions for the displaced must continue. In
other countries, particularly in the South Caucasus,
where the lack of peace agreements meant that return
was not yet a real option for many internally displaced
persons, Governments had taken important initiatives
to improve the living conditions of marginalized
communities which had been displaced for more than a
decade. In fact, helping internally displaced persons to
lead normal lives during their displacement went hand
in hand with safeguarding their right of return.
38. He commended the Government of Georgia on its
national strategy for internally displaced persons and
encouraged it to finalize and implement a
comprehensive action plan which would enhance their
rights in accordance with the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement. Azerbaijan had invested
significant resources in improving the living conditions
of some 700,000 internally displaced persons pending
their return to their place of origin. Newly constructed
settlements had made it possible for camps to be
closed. He welcomed the Government’s plan to closeA/C.3/62/SR.28
7 07-56724
the remaining camps by the end of 2007 and
encouraged it to end any practices deemed
discriminatory, such as in the area of education.
Armenia should take the opportunity to remove itself
from the list of countries experiencing displacement by
undertaking a concerted effort to allow the relatively
small group of remaining internally displaced persons
to return to their place of origin or to become
integrated in the places to which they had been
displaced.
39. He had developed a framework for durable
solutions for internally displaced persons in
cooperation with humanitarian agencies and NGOs; the
framework set forth benchmarks to determine when the
needs, vulnerabilities and violations of rights that
characterized situations of internal displacement could
be considered to have come to an end. The durable
solutions included the return to the place of origin,
local integration into the areas in which internally
displaced persons had initially taken refuge and
settlement in another part of the country. Displacement
ended when one of those durable solutions occurred
and when internally displaced persons no longer had
needs specifically related to their displacement.
40. Resolving internal displacement and achieving
durable solutions were inextricably linked with
achieving lasting peace. Internally displaced persons
had particular vulnerabilities not encountered by
refugees or by other civilians affected by conflict.
Peace agreements therefore needed to focus on the
rights and needs of such persons. They were reluctant
to return to their place of origin or risked being
displaced again in post-conflict areas in which militias
had not been disarmed or landmines removed. Large-
scale return was also unlikely in cases in which
internally displaced persons were unable to recover
their land or property. Settlement or return was not
sustainable when insufficient reconstruction and
economic rehabilitation prevented the displaced from
resuming their livelihood. Impunity diminished the
prospects for reconciliation between the displaced and
those responsible for their displacement. The rights and
needs of internally displaced persons must be taken
into account in peace negotiations and agreements. He
drew attention to a report by the Brookings Institution
and the University of Bern Project on Internal
Displacement, entitled When Displacement Ends: A
Framework for Durable Solutions, which identified
displacement-related issues for incorporation in peace
agreements as well as good practices for doing so. It
also underlined the need to mainstream those issues
into peacebuilding activities and emphasized the
unique institutional opportunity offered by the
Peacebuilding Commission.
41. He noted with concern the serious gaps in
funding mechanisms for protection, transitory
assistance and early recovery activities following the
conclusion of peace agreements. In Côte d’Ivoire, for
instance, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
organizations might be forced to close their offices
because of the lack of donor support.
42. He noted with satisfaction that several situations
had improved over the previous year, such as in Nepal,
southern Sudan and northern Uganda, although the
latter situation remained critical. However, there were
still too many countries with troubling situations.
About 25 per cent of the population in the north of the
Central African Republic was displaced. During his
official mission in February 2007, he had appealed to
the Government as well as rebel groups to adhere to
the fundamental tenets of international human rights
and international humanitarian law and to address the
prevailing impunity. He was concerned that the
growing displacement in Afghanistan had the potential
to increase dramatically given the escalating hostilities
and disregard for international humanitarian law. The
restrictions on humanitarian access were also
particularly worrying. He remained extremely
concerned about the situation in Iraq with its estimated
2.2 million internally displaced persons, whose
numbers continued to grow. Attempts by some regional
and local authorities to stop the entry of persons
seeking refuge were deeply troubling.
43. He also noted with concern the situation in
Somalia, where more than 300,000 persons had been
displaced in recent months, adding to existing
displaced population of 400,000 persons, as well as the
situation in East Timor, where more than 10 per cent of
the population remained displaced. He was concerned
at the large numbers of persons displaced by the
conflict in Sri Lanka, and was grateful to the
Government for its invitation to visit in December
2007. While certain returns had become possible in the
Democratic Republic of Congo in 2007, new
displacements continued in the eastern part of the
country, notably in North Kivu, caused by recent
violence, including systematic rape. The capacities ofA/C.3/62/SR.28
07-56724 8
the Government and the international community to
assist and protect the displaced remained insufficient.
He welcomed the invitation by the Government of the
Sudan to visit Darfur in the spring of 2008. The
situation of roughly 2 million internally displaced
persons in Darfur remained one of the most serious in
the world. He called on all parties to the conflict and
all stakeholders to take full advantage of the current
and forthcoming peace talks, as well as the deployment
of a hybrid force, to create conditions to end violence
against the displaced, to allow unimpeded
humanitarian access and to facilitate sustainable return.
44. Ms. Patricio (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, asked what measures were being
taken by the Representative of the Secretary-General in
order to follow up country visits and the
implementation of his recommendations. She would
also welcome information on his cooperation with the
United Nations system, particularly through the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC); on steps he
took to ensure wide use of the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement, particularly in the peace and
peacebuilding processes; and on his approach to
involving non-State actors in a human rights dialogue
with a view to promoting compliance with the Guiding
Principles. Lastly, she would like to know how, in his
view, the Peacebuilding Commission could best
address the plight of internally displaced persons.
45. Ms. Salayeva (Azerbaijan), stressing the
importance of urban internally displaced persons, noted
that her country continued to implement plans for
improving the condition of some 12,000 families still
residing in camps and school buildings and moving
them to newly built settlements. Her Government
planned further to strengthen its cooperation with the
United Nations and other international bodies with a
view to implementing a “great return programme” once
the occupied territories of Azerbaijan were liberated.
46. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) asked what approach
the Representative of the Secretary-General would
suggest to the complex issue of access to internally
displaced persons and how the Representative planned
to ensure follow-up of his activities and proposals
regarding those persons and their role in peace
processes.
47. Mr. Rees (United States of America) stated that
his delegation appreciated the role of the
Representative of the Secretary-General, considered
the protection of internally displaced persons to be a
major humanitarian challenge and applauded the
“cluster approach” adopted by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee. Noting that in situations of armed
conflict it was necessary to work quickly and
efficiently to protect civilians and that internally
displaced civilians living in camps were not always
protected from serious human rights violations, he
stressed that the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lay with their Government and that
international efforts should complement that function.
However, where a State was unable or unwilling to
protect its civilians, the international community had a
role to play. His delegation would welcome any update
that the Representative of the Secretary-General could
provide regarding, first, an initiative aimed at raising
awareness of protection requirements after natural
disasters and, second, the development of an
international database of national laws and policies on
internally displaced persons.
48. Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) enquired about
Government measures that the Representative of the
Secretary-General considered most effective in
achieving long-term solutions for internally displaced
persons in the framework of a peace process. She also
asked what criteria should be used in determining
under what conditions and after how long a period
persons should cease to be considered internally
displaced. Lastly, she would welcome information on
the implementation of the Guiding Principles at the
national level.
49. Mr. Valvatne (Norway), noting that human rights
mainstreaming was an important part of the mandate of
the Representative of the Secretary-General and that
issues regarding internally displaced persons were
dealt with by various United Nations agencies, asked
for further details about the Representative’s current
and future mainstreaming activities.
50. Mr. Amangoua (Côte d’Ivoire) stated that the
protection of human rights, particularly in time of war,
was a priority for his Government. Since the signing of
the Ouagadougou agreements the social and political
situation had improved and some internally displaced
persons had returned to the north and west of the
country. To improve security further, the police and
gendarmerie capacities should be enhanced. To that
end, his Government requested a partial lifting of the
embargo on non-lethal weapons.A/C.3/62/SR.28
9 07-56724
51. His delegation was concerned about unfounded
references in various resolutions and other documents
to human rights violations in Côte d’Ivoire, including
trafficking in children and economic and sexual
exploitation of internally displaced persons. Such
recurring allegations were contradicted by the report of
the Representative of the Secretary-General, among
others.
52. Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka) said that, after the
restoration of law and order in the Eastern Province of
Sri Lanka, 108,000 internally displaced persons had
returned to their homes and about 50,000 more would
be settled soon. The process had been voluntary and
had taken place in conformity with international
standards. The issue of internally displaced persons in
Sri Lanka was complex. For instance, 90,000 Muslims
had become internally displaced when a terrorist group
had evicted them from their area. While a lasting
solution should be sought, the number of internally
displaced persons in Sri Lanka had recently decreased.
53. Ms. Tchitanava (Georgia) said that the radical
separatist regimes in two regions of Georgia, Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali Region/South Ossetia, had exterminated
the Georgian population and forced about
250,000 survivors, including other nationalities, to
flee. Repatriation was hampered by the absence of a
political solution to the conflict, discriminatory
measures imposed by the de facto authorities against
returnees and widespread insecurity. The
Representative of the Secretary-General had urged the
separatist regime to refrain from measures
incompatible with the right of return and with
international human rights standards, and had called on
the parties to cooperate in creating conditions
conducive to the voluntary return of displaced persons.
54. The Government of Georgia made every effort to
improve the housing, education, health and
employment situation for the displaced population. To
that end, it had adopted in 2007 a special strategy
based on international human rights law and the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. The
implementation of that strategy required efforts by all
relevant stakeholders and considerable donor support.
Work was also under way on a comprehensive action
plan for internally displaced persons, including
property restitution provisions consistent with
international standards. The issue of internally
displaced persons required intensive cooperation
between Governments, United Nations agencies and
NGOs.
55. Mr. Abass (Iraq) said that his Government sought
to create an environment conducive to the return of
displaced persons by combating lawlessness on an
impartial basis, providing basic services and improving
the economy. Those efforts required considerable
contributions from the international community and the
international financial institutions. The Iraqi
Government had planned a conference on assistance to
displaced Iraqis and on reducing the concomitant
burden on host countries, particularly Jordan and the
Syrian Arab Republic. The Government had also
developed a framework for cooperation with the United
Nations and host countries regarding health and
education issues related to displaced Iraqis. There were
plans to set up offices in countries with many displaced
Iraqis in order to assist them.
56. Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) said that cooperation
between the Sudan and the international community for
a lasting solution to the problem of Darfur was a
priority for his Government and had recently taken the
form of a so-called hybrid operation. Referring to
recent allegations concerning trafficking in children
among internally displaced persons, he asked what
measures would be taken in order to protect those
children.
57. Ms. Katabarwa (Uganda) said that since the
cessation of hostilities between the Government and
the Lord’s Resistance Army in northern Uganda, many
internally displaced persons, up to 90 per cent of the
population of some camps, had returned to their homes.
However, near the source of the problem, namely, close
to southern Sudan and northern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, displaced people had preferred to move
into camps pending the outcome of peace talks. The
Government had launched a peace, recovery and
development programme which provided for the
voluntary return of the displaced. Internally displaced
persons were consulted and allowed to move where
they thought that conditions were safer and more
comfortable. In the areas concerned, law enforcement
capacity had been improved, army presence reduced
and the court system restored and made accessible.
Internally displaced persons were involved in planning
and would take part in the implementation, monitoring
and evaluation of the peace and development efforts.
The Government had recently signed furtherA/C.3/62/SR.28
07-56724 10
conciliation agreements with the Lord’s Resistance
Army.
58. Mr. Kälin (Representative of the
Secretary-General on the human rights of internally
displaced persons), replying to the representatives of
Portugal and Norway, said that he considered
cooperation with the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
and the countries concerned to be essential. He worked
closely with country teams, briefed agencies regularly
and tried to make follow-up visits. His mainstreaming
efforts were facilitated by memorandums of
understanding that he had signed with OHCHR and
UNHCR.
59. Replying to the representatives of Portugal,
Russia and the United States, he said that he advocated
the incorporation of the Guiding Principles into
domestic law and policies and appreciated support for
the international database, to be launched very soon.
The related manual for Government staff would be
available in the summer of 2008.
60. Referring to cooperation at the regional level, he
said that, after the ratification of the Great Lakes
protocol on internally displaced persons, which had
strengthened the relevant normative framework, he was
looking forward to an African Union convention, to
which he had been invited to contribute. The
Convention would focus on Governments’ and the
Union’s responsibility with regard to displaced
population groups.
61. Replying to the representative of Portugal, he
said that the approach to be taken to non-State actors
depended on the particular context and the attitude of
the Government concerned.
62. Replying to questions about peacebuilding, he
said that he would continue his dialogue with the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission with a view
to contributing some of his insights and profiting from
lessons learned. In 2008, he would work on a manual
for peace mediators and negotiators.
63. With regard to natural disasters, in addition to the
relevant operational guidelines to which he had
referred in 2006, he would soon make available a field
manual. In promoting a rights-based approach, he had
received support from local Government authorities
and NGOs providing relief and had sought to cooperate
with national human rights institutions in relation to
human rights monitoring and protection.
64. Replying to the representative of the Sudan, he
said that trafficking in children was unacceptable
regardless of whether the children belonged to
internally displaced families.
65. Replying to a question by the representative of
Switzerland, he emphasized the importance of access
to internally displaced persons for humanitarian
purposes and stressed the need for systematic
monitoring to identify inadequate access possibilities
and the underlying causes. Regular dialogue with all
actors was crucial. Providing assistance to vulnerable
groups did not imply taking sides in a conflict, but was
an impartial act.
66. Mr. Scheinin (Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism),
introducing his report (A/62/263), said that in 2007, he
had conducted successful missions to South Africa, the
United States of America and Israel, including the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, and he expected to visit
the Philippines and Spain in 2008. He was, however,
troubled at the slow progress in finalizing the dates for
an official visit to the Philippines.
67. The report focused on the challenges that
counter-terrorism measures posed to compliance with
refugee law and the provision of international
protection. In many parts of the world, such measures
disproportionately affected asylum-seekers, refugees
and immigrants. The report underscored that human
rights law and refugee law, as developed over the
decades, took proper account of the security concerns
of States, and that addressing terrorism did not justify
the revamping of standards and principles of
international protection.
68. The report highlighted certain issues that had a
particular bearing on the possibility of individuals to
have access to refugee protection and the determination
by States of individuals’ need for international
protection. Those issues included pre-entry
interception and screening measures; treatment of
asylum-seekers, exclusion from refugee or other
protection status, including in relation to the
application of the principle of non-refoulement;
repatriation or resettlement of persons detained for
terrorism-related reasons, and strengthening global
responsibility for international protection. Responding
to frequent patterns of mandatory or indefinite
detention of asylum-seekers, the report urged States notA/C.3/62/SR.28
11 07-56724
to depart from the principle of judicial review of the
lawfulness of any form of detention.
69. The issue of so-called diplomatic assurances had
figured strongly in recent debates on action to combat
terrorism and the principle of non-refoulement. His
position on the matter was summarized in the report:
first, diplomatic assurances could never absolve the
sending State of its duty to individually assess the
existence of real risk; second, diplomatic assurances
could at best be considered as one of several factors to
be addressed in the individual assessment of risk; third,
such assessment of risk must be subject to effective
and independent, preferably judicial, safeguards; and
fourth, as diplomatic assurances against torture or
inhuman treatment tended not to work in practice, he
discouraged the establishment of removal or
resettlement mechanisms where such assurances would
play a central role.
70. On the issue of release, repatriation and
resettlement of detainees held for counter-terrorism
reasons in various parts of the world, he welcomed
signs that the Government of the United States planned
to close the military detention facility at Guantánamo
Bay, as recommended in the report.
71. During his visit to the United States he had not
been guaranteed a possibility to interview, in private,
inmates at the Guantánamo Bay detention facility or
other places where the United States Government held
persons suspected of terrorist acts. He had therefore
not been able to visit those facilities, which was
regrettable since all his other country visits, to Turkey,
South Africa and Israel, had included unimpeded
access to terrorism detainees. After his visit, the
Government had extended an invitation to visit
Guantánamo Bay for the purpose of observing
proceedings before military commissions. He
welcomed that invitation and said he would be holding
further consultations with the Government shortly.
72. Ms. Castelo (Portugal), referring to the adoption
of increased border security as a counter-terrorism
measure, said she would welcome the Special
Rapporteur’s recommendations on how States could
implement effective border controls while complying
with human rights law and refugee law, especially with
respect to the principle of non-refoulement. She also
invited the Special Rapporteur to comment on his
contacts with regional organizations, other United
Nations bodies and future prospects for such
cooperation.
73. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) enquired about the
safeguards and rights that should be respected in the
case of detainees brought to trial. He would also
welcome the Special Rapporteur’s opinion on the trial
of civilians in military courts. He asked whether, in
implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
there were sufficient institutional safeguards within the
United Nations system to ensure that a proper balance
was maintained between the protection of human rights
and counter-terrorism measures.
74. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran)
said that the “war on terror” had triggered a “war of
terror” against Muslims, among others. Minority
groups, migrant asylum-seekers and foreigners living
in Western countries were subject to frequent
violations of their fundamental rights, including threats
to their right to life, excessive surveillance,
degradation, extreme media pressure and inhumane
treatment, particularly by law enforcement officers.
Against that background, he would welcome an update
by the Special Rapporteur on the situation regarding
profiling.
75. Mr. Schlosser (Israel) thanked the Special
Rapporteur for his recent visit to Israel and noted the
constructive dialogue between the Special Rapporteur
and the Israeli Government. He appreciated the Special
Rapporteur’s acknowledgement of Israel’s legitimate
security concerns, and said the Special Rapporteur’s
initial recommendations were already under serious
consideration by the Government. While Israel had the
duty to protect its citizens, it had also set human rights
among its highest priorities, and the Government
reserved the right to comment further in future.
76. Mr. Jokinen (Finland) requested additional
insight from the Special Rapporteur on the
identification and dissemination of best practices in
countering terrorism and on the definition of terrorism.
In paragraph 77 of the report, the Special Rapporteur
noted with satisfaction the commitment undertaken by
States in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and its plan of action to the standards of
international law in guiding their actions. He was
therefore curious to know what further steps would be
required in that regard.
77. Ms. Sutikno (Indonesia) commended the
independence and expertise of the Special RapporteurA/C.3/62/SR.28
07-56724 12
in the discharge of his mandate. She said that
Indonesia’s stance against terrorism and its approach to
countering acts of terrorism in compliance with human
rights obligations had been well recognized. The
provision of judicial guarantees to persons suspected of
terrorism was an absolute principle.
78. Concurring with the observations of the Special
Rapporteur on racial profiling, she requested an update
on recent trends concerning that practice and wondered
whether the Special Rapporteur had detected
improvements since reporting to the Human Rights
Council in March 2007. She also wished to know
whether the Special Rapporteur had held consultations
with other relevant special procedures of the United
Nations, including the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
79. Mr. Montwedi (South Africa) said that the
Government of South Africa had adopted national
collective measures to implement most of the Special
Rapporteur’s recommendations. His delegation looked
forward to engaging in further discussions on the
mission report when it was submitted to the December
2007 session of the Human Rights Council.
80. Mr. Rees (United States of America) expressed
his Government’s appreciation for the visit of the
Special Rapporteur, which had included an invitation
to visit Guantánamo Bay on the same terms as those
offered to other international visitors. The United
States looked forward to moving towards the day when
Guantánamo could be closed, and supported the appeal
in the report for States to receive persons currently
detained at Guantánamo for resettlement. His
Government had been pleased to offer the Special
Rapporteur an opportunity to observe military
commission hearings at Guantánamo in November
2007, and regretted that prior engagements had
prevented the Special Rapporteur from accepting the
invitation.
81. The proceedings of the military commissions
should be as transparent as possible; to that end,
domestic and international observers would be invited
to attend future proceedings. The Government had
worked hard to ensure that the military commissions
were fully consistent with all applicable law, including
the Geneva Conventions, and looked forward to
holding accountable persons who had committed
terrible war crimes, including the attacks of
11 September 2001.
82. Mr. Scheinin (Special Rapporteur) said that he
looked forward to discussing his mission reports when
they were presented to the Human Rights Council in
December 2007. In response to the questions posed by
the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Indonesia on profiling, he said that phenomenon was
one of the most troubling issues in considering the
effects of counter-terrorism measures on human rights
because it could amount to discrimination on the basis
of ethnic, religious or other grounds. His ongoing work
in that regard was conducted on a country-specific
basis; he usually raised the subject of profiling with
States and discussed available options and measures to
eradicate the practice. After refugees, it appeared that
the group of persons subjected to profiling was the
second largest to suffer from the adoption of counter-
terrorism measures. He was currently in the process of
compiling best practices in the field of counter-
terrorism while respecting human rights, and would
recommend alternatives to negative profiling practices.
83. With regard to border controls, interception and
non-refoulement, professionalism on the part of border
control officials was crucial. It was alarming that the
border security of sovereign States was increasingly
provided by private corporations. All bodies carrying
out those functions, whether military, public or private
entities, should exercise greater professionalism. They
needed, for example, to be sensitized on the role of
human rights, with respect to the detection of persons
who needed international protection.
84. Concerning non-refoulement, the important
dimension of professionalism was a thorough
awareness of the jurisprudence and practice of
international human rights bodies and regional human
rights courts, regarding both substantive and
procedural issues.
85. He continued to engage in active cooperation
with regional organizations, notably the African Union,
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and
various European bodies. Concerning his cooperation
with United Nations bodies, he emphasized the
importance of addressing the issue of protecting human
rights while countering terrorism together with the
Organization’s political bodies, such as the Security
Council and the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Executive Directorate. The Counter-TerrorismA/C.3/62/SR.28
13 07-56724
Implementation Task Force was also an excellent
framework for further mainstreaming human rights
concerns into counter-terrorism work.
86. He reaffirmed his commitment to compiling a list
of best practices, but noted that the best practices
identified through country visits were often mixed with
problematic dimensions that could not be
recommended to other States. One example was the
definition of terrorism in South Africa, which
represented a best practice in the sense that it had a
structure of cumulative conditions that had to be met.
At the same time, the list of crimes covered was overly
broad. However, he commended South Africa for its
effective parliamentary control over the registration of
suspected terrorists, and for the absence of special
modified procedures.
87. Best practices in the United States included the
rejection of profiling by the Department of Homeland
Security, community outreach, the role of the free
media in controlling counter-terrorism measures by the
executive and the role of the judiciary in exercising
independent judicial control over such measures. He
also praised the level of support granted to victims of
terrorism, in terms of health care, compensation and
rehabilitation.
88. Israel’s example of best practices also contained a
problematic dimension. Like the United States, Israel
applied the concept of “unlawful combatant”. In that
context, however, the existence of periodic judicial
reviews over that classification was commendable.
89. The question raised by the representative of
Finland on the Global Strategy fell within the ambit of
his response regarding cooperation with United
Nations bodies and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. He hoped that future
Security Council resolutions would recognize the
obligation of the United Nations itself to comply with
human rights while countering terrorism.
90. Replying to the representative of Switzerland, he
said that the provision of effective and speedy access to
courts was indispensable in ensuring that the rights of
persons detained on suspicion of terrorism were
respected. It was necessary for courts to ascertain the
legality of detentions, regardless of the context in
which the detentions were carried out. With reference
to the trial of civilians by military courts, he drew
attention to General Comment No. 32 of the Human
Rights Committee on article 14 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which clearly
stated that human rights law did not prohibit military
courts. However, the General Comment convincingly
explained that it might be difficult for such courts to
fulfil certain requirements, such as independence and
impartiality, and concluded that every effort should be
made to avoid trials by military courts.
91. Concerning the existence of safeguards within the
United Nations for the protection of human rights, he
noted the obligation of the Security Council in that
connection. There was also scope for further reform of
the sanctions regime, which should be made more
transparent and subject to independent review.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.