United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.33
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
9 January 2008
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-57402 (E)
*0757402*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 33rd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 31 October 2007, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.33
07-57402 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/62/36, A/62/369 and A/62/464)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/62/183, A/62/207,
A/62/212, A/62/214, A/62/218, A/62/222,
A/62/225, A/62/227, A/62/254, A/62/255,
A/62/265, A/62/280, A/62/286, A/62/287,
A/62/288, A/62/289, A/62/293, A/62/298,
A/62/304, A/62/317 and A/C.3/62/3)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/62/213, A/62/223, A/62/263, A/62/264,
A/62/275, A/62/313, A/62/318, A/62/354,
A/62/498 and A/C.3/62/4)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (continued) (A/62/230)
1. Mr. Murata (Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, FAO) said that, to mark the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which provided an ideal opportunity for
the United Nations system to demonstrate its
commitment to those rights, it had been proposed that
the United Nations should launch a one-year system-
wide information campaign on the occasion of
International Human Rights Day in order to raise
awareness about the aspects of fundamental rights that
were most pertinent to the work of United Nations
agencies and to emphasize the importance of dignity
and justice for all.
2. Having unanimously adopted the Voluntary
Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of
the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National
Food Security in 2004, FAO had established the Right
to Food Unit which was responsible for assisting
countries with the implementation of the Guidelines,
developing working methodologies and tools for those
countries, providing them with information and
building their capacities, and ensuring that the right to
food was systematically integrated into its own work.
FAO was currently working with some 10 countries to
integrate the right to food into their legislation,
policies, strategies and programmes. It encouraged all
States to acquaint themselves with and to disseminate
the Guidelines. Moreover, following the Guidelines
was the best way of implementing the right to food.
3. In 2007, FAO had made “the right to food” the
theme for World Food Day in recognition of the
important role of human rights in the eradication of
poverty and hunger. That event had provided an
opportunity to raise awareness about that fundamental
human right, to search for ways to achieve it and to
create partnerships to overcome the challenges ahead.
4. Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico), reaffirming her
country’s commitment to the promotion and protection
of fundamental rights and freedoms, welcomed the
adoption on 13 December 2006 of the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional
Protocol, two instruments which would contribute to
eliminating discrimination against persons with
disabilities and enable them to integrate into society.
Mexico welcomed the fact that many countries had
immediately acceded to the Convention and its
Optional Protocol. Her Government would deposit its
instrument of ratification for those instruments very
shortly.
5. She welcomed the efforts made by the United
Nations to promote and disseminate the Convention
and the Protocol, to progressively implement the
standards and guidelines relating to accessibility within
its facilities, and to foster the participation of disabled
persons’ organizations in the work of its human rights
bodies. During the current session, New Zealand,
Sweden and Mexico would co-sponsor a draft
resolution aimed at promoting the swift entry into force
of the Convention and its Protocol. It would then be
necessary to disseminate and implement the two
instruments in collaboration with national institutions
as well as civil society organizations, which had played
a constructive role in the elaboration of the
Convention.
6. Referring to the protection of the human rights
of migrants, she stressed the full importance of that
issue for her country, which was modernizing its
migrant detention centres and bringing its legislation
into line with international standards and which had
invited the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants to conduct a follow-up visit to its territory.
Mexico believed that the human rights of migrants
should be at the heart of the work of bodies dealing
with the issue of migration, including the forthcoming
Global Forum on Migration and Development. It urgedA/C.3/62/SR.33
3 07-57402
those States that had not yet done so to sign and ratify
the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families and invited those that had signed and ratified
the Convention to collaborate on that issue with the
Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families.
7. Mexico was making a concerted effort to
eliminate torture. Following national consultations, her
Government had instructed the National Human Rights
Commission to serve as a national mechanism for the
prevention of torture, in accordance with the Optional
Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment. The Government had also taken steps to
provide training to the staff of federal centres for social
rehabilitation and human rights commissions of
different Mexican states in order to ensure that they
were informed about the Optional Protocol and the
procedures laid down by the Federal Attorney-
General’s Office in its directive No. A/057/2003
regarding medical and psychological analysis in
connection with alleged acts of torture or ill treatment.
8. In conclusion, welcoming the report of the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism (A/62/263) and the report of the
Secretary-General on protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
(A/62/298), she said that Mexico intended to introduce
a new initiative on that question
9. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea), speaking in exercise of the right of reply,
said that his delegation resolutely rejected the
allegations made during the preceding meeting by the
representative of the United States, which were
groundless. It was preposterous for the United States to
accuse other countries of violating human rights when
it continued to kill innocent people and establish secret
prisons where it practised torture. The allegations made
by the United States against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea were a mockery of the international
community and an insult to human rights. The United
States should stop stigmatizing countries that were not
obedient to it and clean its own untidy house.
10. Canada had no business, either, pretending to be a
human rights judge when it supported and encouraged
the actions of so-called non-governmental
organizations which abducted nationals of his country
and incited riots on its territory. He appealed to Canada
to address the situation of its indigenous people, who
lived under regrettable conditions with respect to
education, health care, access to employment and
social welfare, instead of trying to find fault with other
countries.
11. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, said that the statement
made by the representative of the United States during
the meeting that morning had been yet another
extremist sermon which had divided the sovereign
world into two categories, “good guys” and “bad
guys”, and had established a single criterion for
determining whether Member States of the United
Nations fell into one or the other category and whether
they did or did not respect human rights. Such a
statement was out of place, given that, only a few days
earlier, 184 States had voted against the illegal
embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba, the
only exception being Israel, and also given that
millions of people in the United States had recently
marched in the streets to condemn the occupation of
Iraq and the murder of civilians and the excesses of
private United States security firms in that country.
Such arrogance was all the more out of place
considering that: the United States was violating
human rights in Guantanamo and in its “flying prisons”
and other secret detention centres; according to the
report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions (A/62/265), Israel and
the United States engaged in “targeted killings”; and
trials by United States courts martial of those who
violated civil rights in Iraq and Afghanistan always
ended with the defendants being absolved instead of
penalized.
12. The United States clearly used human rights for
political ends, and the extremists and fundamentalists
within its Government promoted the myth of the clash
of civilizations, of cultures and of religions,
misrepresenting Islam and Muslims and fabricating
illusory enemies solely for propaganda purposes. The
world could only reject their so-called principles.
Alluding to the statement made by the representative of
Canada during the morning meeting, he said that
Canada would do well to steer clear of the example set
by the United States.
13. Mr. Shinyo (Japan), speaking in exercise of the
right of reply, said that his delegation rejected theA/C.3/62/SR.33
07-57402 4
allegation made during the previous meeting by the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, according to which the Japanese Government
was repressing nationals and associations of that
country. The measures taken by his Government were
strictly in accordance with national laws and without
discrimination. Legal action was taken against people
and entities in Japan only if they broke the law, which
was precisely what had occurred in the case of the
persons and association to which the representative of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had
alluded. The Japanese police had had a valid search
warrant when they conducted a search of the premises
of an association of Korean residents in April 2007.
They had made no threats during the search, and the
measures taken subsequently against the association in
question had been aimed at recovering part of a debt
that it owed.
14. In conclusion, he hoped that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would refrain from making
false allegations in order to divert the attention of the
international community. Japan was ready to negotiate
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
settle various issues, including the matter of
abductions, nuclear and missile issues and the disputes
arising from past events, in order thus to normalize
relations between the two countries.
15. Mr. Ke Yousheng (China), speaking in exercise
of the right of reply, said that during the morning
meeting, the representative of the United States had
once again accused several countries, including China,
of failing to protect human rights adequately. His
statement had been based on clichés and groundless
accusations. Quick to denounce what was happening in
other countries, the representative seemed to have
forgotten what was happening in his own country, and
in Iraq and Afghanistan. The killing of 17 innocent
Iraqi civilians by employees of the Blackwater
company was yet another illustration of the collateral
damage of United States armed and security force
actions. Under the pretext of counter-terrorism, the
Government of the United States had not hesitated to
infringe the right to privacy and freedom of opinion
and expression, notably by tightening its control over
the Internet. Moreover, racism and xenophobia were
rampant in the United States, as was evidenced by the
plethora of human rights violations among
Amerindians and other minority ethnic groups. He
hoped that the representative of the United States
would remember all that before setting himself up as a
human rights judge, and that he would wake up to the
hypocrisy of his country with respect to human rights.
16. With regard to the statement made by the
representative of Canada during the morning meeting,
his singling out of several developing countries for
criticism, China among them, ran counter to the spirit
of dialogue and cooperation promoted in General
Assembly resolution 60/251. That was all the more
regrettable given that the human rights situation in
Canada was far from satisfactory and that the
representative had failed to mention the acts of
Canada’s allies. With regard to the Olympic Games, to
which the Canadian representative had referred, China
was opposed to any attempt to link the Games to
political considerations.
17. In their efforts to promote and protect human
rights, Member States should prefer dialogue and
cooperation over confrontation, respect over arrogance
and insolence, and sincerity over hypocrisy.
18. Ms. Gendi (Egypt), speaking in exercise of the
right of reply with regard to the statement by the
representative of Canada, said that Egypt was a country
with institutions and with a strong judiciary and legal
system, a country that respected human rights and did
not practise discrimination against any ethnic minority
or other group. The same could not be said of Canada,
where acts against migrants and indigenous peoples
had been denounced in the reports of several special
procedures mandate holders. Egypt was also a country
that played a constructive role within the United
Nations system, something else that could not be said
of Canada, which had been the sole country to vote
against the Human Rights Council institution-building
package simply because it included an item concerning
the right to self-determination of the Palestinian people
and the human rights violations in the occupied
Palestinian territories. She wondered how a country
could portray itself as a defender of human rights when
it refused to denounce certain situations and defended
flagrant violations.
19. She would therefore recommend that Canada re-
examine its policies on human rights in its own
territory and at the international level before sitting in
judgement of other countries.
20. Mr. Schlosser (Israel), speaking in exercise of
the right of reply, said that he was surprised that
Kuwait would be concerned about the Palestinians inA/C.3/62/SR.33
5 07-57402
the territories, since Palestinians had been persecuted
in Kuwait shortly after the first Gulf war. He was also
surprised that the observer for Palestine continued to
blame Israel solely for a situation that both parties
would like to change. Israel had recognized the right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination many years
earlier, but the Palestinians had yet to recognize
Israel’s right to live in peace and security. Under the
international agreements signed between the two
parties, the Palestinians had not only rights but also
responsibilities, the first and foremost of which was to
denounce terror and stop the violence. Regrettably,
despite Israel’s disengagement from the Gaza Strip, the
threat of suicide bombings in the territories continued,
and Qassam rockets were still being launched from
Gaza on a daily basis, targeting Israeli civilians and
their property. The Palestinian Authority did nothing to
stop them. That was all the more regrettable given that
the real cause for the deterioration of the situation in
Gaza was the takeover by Hamas terrorists in June
2007 and the ongoing internal fighting, to which the
observer for Palestinian had turned a blind eye. Israel
had a duty to defend its citizens, and it did so with due
respect for international humanitarian standards and
human rights. His Government hoped that the current
talks and the forthcoming meeting between the Israeli
Prime Minister and the Palestinian President would
lead soon to the achievement of peace for the benefit of
the two peoples.
21. Mr. Aksen (Turkey), speaking in exercise of the
right of reply, objected strenuously to the assertion by
the Greek delegation that the problem of Cyprus went
back to 1974, whereas United Nations peacekeeping
forces had been present on the island since 1964. The
Greek delegation was careful not to say that since 1963
the Greek Cypriots had pursued a policy of
intimidation, forced expulsions and ethnic cleansing, in
particular by pushing the Turkish Cypriot leaders out
of the Government and by forcing 180,000 Turkish
Cypriots to take refuge in enclaves that represented
only three per cent of the island’s territory. He recalled
that his country had intervened militarily only 11 years
later, in 1974, for the sole purpose of re-establishing
peace after a military coup d’état engineered by Greece
and saving the Turkish Cypriots from being wiped out
altogether. The Cyprus problem was therefore the
consequence of 20 years of provocations on the part of
Greece, which wanted at all costs to annex the Turkish
part of Cyprus. In 2004 the Turkish Cypriots had voted
in favour of the Annan Plan for it had seemed to them
to offer a solution, but the upshot was that they
continued to live in the total isolation imposed upon
them by the Greek Cypriot party. More than ever open
to dialogue, Turkey encouraged the two parties to reach
a just and lasting settlement of their conflict, in
accordance with Security Council recommendations,
but observed that for that to happen, the Greek Cypriot
party would have to be ready to cooperate. The latter’s
rejection of the Annan Plan raised serious doubts in
that connection.
22. Ms. Nawaz (Pakistan), speaking in exercise of
the right of reply, said that she had been outraged when
she had heard Switzerland lecture other countries at a
meeting the previous day on respect for the right to
life, when barely two weeks earlier, the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance had
expressed concern over draconian legislation proposed
by the Swiss People’s Party that harked back to Nazi
laws. The electoral campaign of that extreme right-
wing party, which had put out a poster with a heavily
racist message, was flagrant evidence of a rebirth of
racism and xenophobia in one of the oldest
democracies in the world, all the more shocking
because the poster in question had been published in
the newspapers and sent by mail to voters’ homes and
because it had been produced by a political party with
the majority in Parliament that was a member of the
coalition Government. Pakistan considered it
regrettable that a country that was host to so many
international bodies did not set a better example.
23. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking in exercise
of the right of reply, said that he was disappointed at
the lack of cooperation and mutual respect in the
Committee’s debates, and thus deplored that Canada
had chosen, in line with the United States and the
European Union, to interpret human rights in terms of
its own unipolar vision of the world and its own
interests. It should be recalled that the human rights
situation in Canada was far from rosy, that racism and
xenophobia were steadily growing and that the rights
of migrants were consistently trampled. The indigenous
Canadian peoples continued to lead a precarious
existence, because they could not exploit the ancestral
lands that the Government refused to restore to them,
and they were up against the difficult choice of
assimilation or marginalization. Underrepresented in
the working population and overrepresented in the
prisons, condemned to a miserable existence, theyA/C.3/62/SR.33
07-57402 6
were, besides that, victims of police violence
committed with total impunity. Furthermore, in the
name of anti-terrorism, the Canadian Government
continued to restrict the civil and cultural rights of
other minorities. The countries of the North must stop
their unjustified lecturing of the countries of the South
where human rights were concerned, and a genuine
intercultural dialogue should be instituted.
24. Mr. Pham Hai Anh (Viet Nam), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, denied Canada’s
allegations at the previous meeting that certain human
rights defenders, which its delegation had not
identified in any way, were being harassed and
arbitrarily imprisoned in his country. Viet Nam,
believing that the exercise of human rights could be
promoted only by dialogue and cooperation, was
working with other countries to defend their mutual
interests in that regard and practised neither
harassment nor arbitrary detention of its own nationals.
All its citizens were equal before the law and the
Government applied clearly defined legal procedures to
punish those who broke the law, regardless of how
their acts might be qualified by other countries.
25. Ms. Grabianowska (Poland), taking exception to
the statement made the previous day, 30 October, by
Singapore, said that the current debate on the death
penalty in Poland should be seen only as an illustration
of freedom of expression. Capital punishment did not
exist in her country and neither the Government nor
any of the main political parties had the intention of
changing that state of affairs in any way. Poland,
moreover, was a sponsor of the draft resolution against
the death penalty, in keeping with the position of the
European Union, of which it was a member.
26. Mr. Hijazi (Observer for Palestine), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, said it was unfortunate
that the representative of Israel tried to justify the
massive human rights violations his Government was
committing, by using dishonest arguments whose only
aim was to allow Israel to shirk its legal and moral
obligations and absolve itself of any responsibility for
its actions. It was high time for Israel to recognize the
60 years of occupation, put an end to it and make
reparation for the damage caused to millions of
refugees who were still waiting to be able to return to
their homes. Palestine, despite the limited means at its
disposal — still further reduced in recent years by the
occupying Power’s systematic destruction of the
Palestinian infrastructure — had spared no effort in
fulfilling its international obligations. It had
condemned all illegal acts of violence, regardless of
the perpetrators. The anti-terrorism that was Israel’s
pretext in no way justified the suffering of the
Palestinian people. Palestine supported all the
recommendations and conclusions in the report of the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 and
hoped that Israel would do the same.
27. Mr. Stavrou (Cyprus), speaking in exercise of
the right of reply, said it was regrettable, that year after
year, Turkey brought up the same tendentious
accusations against Cyprus, for the sole purpose of
distracting attention from its own responsibility in the
situation on the island. If Cyprus was still partitioned,
it was because the Turkish army continued to occupy a
large part of that independent country, a member of the
United Nations and of the European Union, in defiance
of Security Council resolutions and the European Court
of Justice ruling. The question of Cyprus could not be
settled as long as Turkey did not withdraw its troops
from the island and allow the Greek and Turkish
Cypriots to live side by side in peace.
28. Mr. Normandin (Canada), speaking in exercise
of the right of reply to several delegations, said that
Canada itself recognized that its human rights situation
was not ideal and that the work of the human rights
defenders was helping the Government to redress the
shortcomings. Canada had spoken simply as a member
country because it thought it necessary to speak of
human rights in a specific, not abstract, way, in
keeping with the rules of an open, frank and courteous
dialogue.
29. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea), speaking again in exercise of the right of
reply to the representative of Japan, said that the
sanctions imposed on his country’s nationals and their
associations was a result of the Japanese Government’s
deliberate intention to put an end to activities by
associations of nationals of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The Japanese attitude was not at all
surprising if one considered that for over 50 years it
had been denying the crimes against humanity that it
had committed, especially by providing “comfort
women” for its soldiers for more than 50 years. The
Japanese delegation should realize that any attempt by
his country to conceal its actions would be in vain and
would in no way help it to take on greater
responsibilities within the international community.A/C.3/62/SR.33
7 07-57402
30. Mr. Shinyo (Japan), speaking again in exercise of
the right of reply to the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, observed that
the nationals and the associations in question had
broken Japanese law and owed a great deal of money
to the Japanese treasury. They had therefore not been
subjected to any discrimination. Furthermore, the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea was the last one who should be dredging up
events from the past, when his country had once
kidnapped 17 Japanese persons, and the whereabouts
of 12 of them were still unknown. He therefore called
upon the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
honour its human rights obligations and refrain from
any further violations in its own territory and abroad.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.