United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.43
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
7 February 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-58803 (E)
*1158803*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 43rd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 10 November 2011, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance (continued)
(b) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance: Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights
(a) Promotion and protection of human rights: Implementation of human rights
instruments (continued)
(b) Promotion and protection of human rights: Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)A/C.3/66/SR.43
11-58803 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.64/Rev.1: Report of the
Human Rights Council
1. Ms. Maduhu (United Republic of Tanzania),
speaking on behalf of the African Group, introduced
the draft resolution, which took note of the report of
the Human Rights Council and the recommendations
contained therein.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.66: Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on a communications procedure
2. Mr. Gavalec (Slovakia), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the main sponsors, recalled that
a communications procedure had been discussed when
the Convention had been adopted twenty years
previously. Thanks to the efforts of civil society, the
idea had been revived. The Human Rights Council had
established a working group to draft the optional
protocol in 2009, and in June that year had adopted a
resolution recommending to the General Assembly the
final adoption of the optional protocol and its opening
for signature in 2012. The draft resolution sought to
fulfil that recommendation, taking up the language
recommended by the Human Rights Council. The main
sponsors had held informal consultations on the text
and in a spirit of compromise had agreed to revise the
first preambular paragraph, although the amendment
represented a departure from the recommended
language. The words “Welcoming the adoption” should
be replaced with the words “Taking note with
appreciation of the adoption”.
3. The Convention on the Rights of the Child was
the only international human rights treaty without a
communications procedure mechanism. By adopting
the draft resolution, the Committee would be helping to
fill a significant legal gap and making an important
contribution to improving the protection of children’s
rights. He thanked all parties involved in the initiative,
including representatives of States, civil society, the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, and in particular
the Chairperson of the Working Group on the Optional
Protocol, who had successfully led the negotiations.
Given the significance of the draft resolution for the
protection of children’s rights, he hoped that the
Committee would adopt it by consensus.
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(b) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance:
Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.68: Global efforts for the
total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
4. Mr. Cesa (Argentina), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said
that the recent adoption of the political declaration
commemorating the ten-year anniversary of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action was evidence of
the international community’s commitment to
eliminating racism and intolerance. The draft
resolution aimed to ensure that the major issues
emphasized in the Durban Declaration remained a
priority in the international agenda. The text also
sought to establish 2012-2022 as the Decade for People
of African Descent.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of human rights:
Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.27/Rev.1: World Down
Syndrome Day
5. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
6. Mr. Almeida (Brazil), speaking on behalf of the
main sponsors, said that Austria, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Ecuador,
Finland, France, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Monaco, the Philippines, Romania, Spain and
the United Kingdom had joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution. The draft resolution aimed to raise
awareness of the inherent dignity of persons with
intellectual disabilities and designated 21 March asA/C.3/66/SR.43
3 11-58803
World Down Syndrome Day, to be observed every year
beginning in 2012.
7. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Iraq had been incorrectly listed as a sponsor of the
draft resolution. He announced that Albania, Armenia,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Colombia,
Eritrea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Jordan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malaysia,
Mauritania, Monaco, Morocco, Montenegro, Nicaragua,
Paraguay, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) had joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution.
8. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.27/Rev.1 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.28/Rev. 1: Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment
9. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
10. Ms. Raabymagle (Denmark) noted that one of
the fundamental principles of the United Nations was
the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Torture
nevertheless continued to be used all over the world.
11. Following consultations and meetings with
interested delegations, she wished to introduce oral
revisions to the text of draft resolution
A/C.3/66/L.28/Rev.1.
12. The ninth preambular paragraph should begin
with “Deeply concerned with,” rather than “Deeply
concerned about”. The words “persons exercising their
rights of peaceful assembly and freedom of
expression” should replace “peaceful protesters,” and
“in all situations and” should be deleted.
13. Paragraph 8 was to follow paragraph 5 and be
renumbered 5bis. In paragraph 14, “notes” should
replace “acknowledges,” and “, bearing in mind its
principle of complementarity”, should be inserted
before “and encourages States”. In paragraph 22, “can”
should replace “is known to”.
14. In addition to the 68 sponsors mentioned in the
revised document, Azerbaijan, Burkina Faso, Côte
d’Ivoire, Iraq, Israel, Mali, Paraguay, San Marino,
Timor-Leste and Tunisia had joined as sponsors.
15. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Nicaragua, the
Niger, Sierra Leone and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
16. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.28/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
(b) Promotion and protection of human rights:
Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.43: Strengthening the role
of the United Nations in enhancing periodic and
genuine elections and the promotion of democratization
17. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
introducing the draft resolution, said that the holding of
periodic and fair elections was integral to a democracy.
The landmark events of the past year had only
emphasized the importance of genuine elections. He
hoped the draft resolution would be adopted by
consensus.
18. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Andorra, Benin, Botswana, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Haiti,
India, Liberia, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Morocco,
Paraguay, Peru and San Marino had joined the sponsors
of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.46*: Effective promotion of
the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to
National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities
19. Mr. Strasser (Austria), introducing the draft
resolution, said that his delegation had consistently
acted as the main sponsor of resolutions on the rights
of persons belonging to minorities not only within the
Third Committee, but also within the Human Rights
Council. The draft resolution drew attention to the
importance of the protection of rights of persons
belonging to minorities for the prevention and peaceful
resolution of conflicts. It also placed a special focus on
the twentieth anniversary in 2012 of the adoption of the
Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to
National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic
Minorities. He recalled that the Declaration provided
guidance to States in ensuring non-discrimination and
served as the main reference for the work of the UnitedA/C.3/66/SR.43
11-58803 4
Nations to ensure the rights of persons belonging to
minorities. The upcoming anniversary offered an
opportunity to reflect on achievements and challenges
in implementing the Declaration.
20. He announced that Armenia, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Guatemala, Honduras, Lebanon, Malta,
Mauritius, Panama, Poland, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Serbia, Slovenia and Ukraine had joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution. He noted that editorial
changes had been made to previously agreed upon
language in paragraphs 8, 16 and 19 and said that the
original language used would be restored.
21. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Timor-Leste had joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.52: Protection of migrants
22. Ms. Díaz Gras (Mexico), introducing the draft
resolution, said that, Mexico being both an origin and
transit country for migrants, her Government viewed
migration issues as a shared responsibility. The draft
resolution did not seek to promote migration or the
hiring of undocumented workers, but rather affirmed
that an individual’s human rights should not depend on
his or her legal status. The text had adapted language
developed by the Human Rights Council emphasizing
States’ responsibility to protect the human rights of
migrants, in particular the right of child migrants to
education, regardless of the structure of the
Government. The importance of dialogue between civil
society and Government with regard to migration
issues was also highlighted. She announced that
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Paraguay, Peru, the
Philippines, Turkey and Uruguay had joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution and urged Member
States to adopt it by consensus.
23. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Algeria, Armenia, Belarus, Eritrea,
Guyana, India, Kyrgyzstan, Mali, Morocco, Nigeria
and Tajikistan had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.42: Sub-regional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
(continued)
24. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
25. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria, Angola, Burkina Faso, Chad, Chile, the
Comoros, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Madagascar, Morocco, the
Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Príncipe, Togo,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, and
Zimbabwe had joined as sponsors.
26. Ms. Muhimpundu (Burundi) said that Argentina,
Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, Djibouti, the Gambia,
Germany, Greece, Guinea, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Luxembourg, Mozambique, Namibia, Pakistan,
Romania, Spain, Uganda, the United Kingdom and the
United States had joined as sponsors of the draft
resolution.
27. A major contribution had been made by the
Centre to human rights awareness-raising and training
in the region. The Centre, now celebrating its tenth
anniversary, had strengthened the capabilities of the
national human rights institutions in Member States in
the Central African region, and had facilitated the
setting up of transitional mechanisms of justice in
countries of the sub-region affected by conflict. The
themes of the Centre’s programme would be continued
during 2012-2013. She invited all other delegations to
join the sponsors, and hoped that the Committee would
adopt the resolution by consensus, as had been the case
in previous years.
28. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Australia, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, El
Salvador, France, Hungary, India, Lesotho, Lithuania,
Mali, Mauritania, Portugal, Serbia, Slovenia, the
Sudan, and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia had joined as sponsors.
29. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.42 was adopted.A/C.3/66/SR.43
5 11-58803
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.12/Rev.1: Preparations for
and observance of the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family
30. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
31. Mr. Cesa (Argentina), speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, noted that the draft resolution
reflected a number of amendments resulting from
consultations.
32. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Azerbaijan, Belarus, El Salvador, the Russian
Federation and Turkey had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution.
33. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.12/Rev.1 was adopted.
34. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking in
explanation of position on behalf of the States
members of the European Union, said that the
European Union attached great importance to family-
related issues. As early as 1989, the European
Commission had established the European Observatory
on National Family Policies, which had advocated for
policies that supported the reconciliation of work and
family life and the provision of assistance to vulnerable
families. While the European Union shared the view
expressed in the draft resolution that the family
contributed to strengthening society, it also believed
that family policies must be inclusive in their
definitions of family. The family was an ever-evolving,
dynamic entity and the European Union was committed
to recognizing that diversity. The major international
summits of the 1990s had promoted respect for
diversity as a value; that position should be extended to
include the family in its many forms. The European
Union therefore took all references to the family in the
draft resolution to reflect an inclusive definition of the
family unit.
35. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his Government attached great importance to the
family, as evidenced by the declaration by the
President of September 27 as Family Day. With regard
to the draft resolution, his delegation regretted that it
had not included the critical concept that “in different
cultural, social and political systems various forms of
the family exist”, as expressed in the 1994 Programme
of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development and echoed in General
Assembly resolution 65/277, known as the Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.14: Brain Education
as a tool for implementing the Millennium
Development Goals and contributing to global Peace
and Development
36. Mr. Funes (El Salvador) withdrew the draft
resolution, without prejudice to the possibility of
reintroducing it in the future.
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.67: Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
37. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
38. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
clarified that Peru had been incorrectly listed as a
sponsor of the draft resolution.
39. Mr. Jafarov (Azerbaijan) thanked those
delegations that had sponsored the draft resolution and
invited others to join as sponsors.
40. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cameroon,
India, the Russian Federation, Serbia, Togo and
Turkmenistan had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
41. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.67 was adopted.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.