United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.38
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
29 January 2013
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record..
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-59219 (E)
*1259219*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 38th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 8 October 2012, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)A/C.3/67/SR.38
12-59219 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.54)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.54: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
1. Mr. Selim (Egypt), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Andorra, Angola, Benin, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Burundi, Cape Verde, Chad, Cuba,
Djibouti, Estonia, the Gambia, Guyana, Italy, Lebanon,
Mauritania, Montenegro, Peru, Romania, Serbia,
Somalia, South Africa, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland had joined the sponsors. The draft
resolution contained some technical updates, but was
otherwise quite similar to the one on the same topic
adopted during the previous session. Respect for and
preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and
integrity of all of the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, was central to the attainment
and exercise by the Palestinian people of the right to
self-determination, for it was only on such territory
that could the Palestinians establish their independent,
sovereign and viable State.
2. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Barbados, Côte d’Ivoire, Nigeria, the Republic of
Moldova, San Marino and Slovakia had joined the
sponsors.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.33, L.34, L.36,
L.37, L.38, L.39, L.41, L.42, L.43, L.44 and L.54)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.33: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
3. Mr. Selim (Egypt), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Azerbaijan, Benin, Burundi,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Cuba, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Guyana, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Lebanon, Mali, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Somalia and South Sudan had joined the sponsors. The
draft resolution contained technical updates and new
references, in the preambular section, to the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference, adopted
in 2009, the political declaration of the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate the
tenth anniversary of adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action in 2011 and
Human Rights Council resolutions 17/4 and 21/5. The
draft resolution was an objective attempt to address the
relationship between globalization and the realization
of all human rights.
4. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Haiti and Mauritania had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.34: Human rights in the
administration of justice
5. Ms. Thallinger (Austria), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Brazil, Costa Rica, Iceland, Israel,
Lebanon, Paraguay, San Marino, Thailand and Uruguay
had joined the sponsors. The draft resolution retained
its focus on the situation of persons deprived of their
liberty, detention conditions, juvenile justice and
children in detention. It referenced the recent entry into
force of the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the
United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to
Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems.
6. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Côte d’Ivoire, Jordan and Somalia had joined the
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36: Extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions
7. Ms. Nilsson (Sweden), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark,
Finland, Iceland and Norway and the other sponsors,
said that Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Chile, Greece, Honduras, Mexico, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Uruguay had joined the sponsors.
8. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Albania, Georgia, Paraguay and Somalia had
joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.37: Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights
9. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.A/C.3/67/SR.38
3 12-59219
10. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Angola, Nigeria, the Russian Federation and
Somalia had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.38: Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures
11. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
introduced the draft resolution.
12. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Somalia had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.39: The right to
development
13. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution on behalf of the Movement of Non-
Aligned Countries said that the draft resolution
continued to follow up on the activity of the open
ended working group on the right to development of
the Human Rights Council. Genuine implementation of
the right to development was frequently lacking.
14. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Nigeria, Somalia and South Sudan had joined the
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.41: Promotion of peace as
a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of all human
rights by all
15. Mr. Amoros Nuñez (Cuba), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that the
policies of all States should aim to avoid the threat of
war and settle disputes peacefully. A world without war
was needed to ensure well-being, development and
respect for fundamental human rights. Algeria, Brazil,
China, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Myanmar, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and the
Syrian Arab Republic had joined the sponsors.
16. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Ethiopia, Eritrea, Jordan, Madagascar, Namibia,
Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and Turkmenistan had
joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/6/L.42: The right to food
17. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that
Algeria, Brazil, China, Ecuador, Grenada, Guatemala,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Monaco,
Myanmar, Nigeria, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Suriname, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Viet Nam had joined the sponsors. While the right to
food had been reaffirmed in numerous international
instruments, it remained remote for many.
18. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Albania, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, the
Bahamas, Barbados, Burundi, Cameroon, the
Comorros, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nigeria, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Senegal, Somalia,
South Sudan, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda and Zimbabwe
had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.43: Promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order
19. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution, said that Algeria, Brazil, China, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Viet Nam had joined the sponsors.
20. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, India,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Namibia, Somalia and
South Sudan had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.44: Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty
21. Ms. Curkovic (Croatia), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Kyrgyzstan, Mali, Mongolia,
Paraguay and Somalia had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.53: International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
22. Mr. Cabouat (France), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the other main sponsors,
Argentina and Morocco, and all of the other sponsors,
said that Andorra, Armenia, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Haiti, Madagascar, Mauritania,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Serbia and Tunisia had joined
the sponsors.A/C.3/67/SR.38
12-59219 4
23. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Honduras, Nigeria and Somalia had joined the
sponsors.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.49, L.50, L.51 and L.52)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.49: Situation of human
rights in Myanmar
24. Ms. Rafti (Cyprus), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the European Union, said that
Albania, Australia, Canada, Israel, Norway and
Switzerland had also joined the sponsors.
25. She noted that over the past year, some major
steps had been taken by the Government towards
political reform to improve the human rights situation
in the country and engage with the international
community. Productive consultations had been held
with the country concerned during the drafting process,
and agreement reached on the draft resolution, which
reflected both the progress made and issues still to be
addressed in Myanmar.
26. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) noted
that the draft resolution should be corrected to reflect
that Grenada was not a sponsor.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.50: Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
27. Ms. Rafti (Cyprus), introducing the draft
resolution, said that the General Assembly had adopted
resolutions on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea driven by a
shared concern about the grave, widespread and
systematic human rights abuses — namely persistent
violations of civil, political and economic, social and
cultural rights — documented in the reports of the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
that country, as well as in the reports of the Secretary-
General.
28. The text took into account some positive steps
registered during the past year, including limited
cooperation with United Nations entities, and improved
access for persons with disabilities. Nevertheless, the
positive developments were few, and substantive
changes on the ground were needed.
29. The sponsors of the resolution had informed the
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea about the draft, but as in previous years, the
delegation had refused to engage in discussions. It was
hoped that the delegation would respond favourably to
the availability of the Secretary-General’s good offices
to promote dialogue with its Government on ways to
strengthen the protection and promotion of human
rights in that country.
30. Mr. Jang Il Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that his delegation categorically rejected
the draft resolution, which was the product of
politicization, double standards and selectivity vis-à-
vis human rights, and aimed to isolate and stifle the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The draft text
reflected the manipulation by the Government of the
United States of America to distort the human rights
situation in his country, and the aim of overthrowing
the socialist system there.
31. The human rights violations debated by the
Committee, such as discrimination and violence
against women and children or freedom of expression
and opinion, had no relevance to the reality in his
country. His country’s human rights situation had been
reviewed in the context of the universal periodic
review mechanism, in December 2009.
32. The main sponsors of the draft resolution had not
apologized or provided compensation in relation to the
crimes against humanity that they had committed, and
continued to commit, as they participated in armed
aggression against sovereign States. They should
reflect on the human rights record of their own
countries before criticizing others.
33. His Government rejected all other country-
specific resolutions which incited confrontation and
distrust and would continue to defend and safeguard
the socialist system chosen by its people.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.51: Situation of Human
Rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
34. Ms. Rishchynski (Canada), introducing the draft
resolution, said that it had been prepared carefully to
ensure accuracy and to reflect the findings of the
Secretary-General’s report (A/67/327). Concerns about
the serious human rights situation in that country,
raised in past resolutions, remained unaddressed; the
situation thus called for continued international
attention.A/C.3/67/SR.38
5 12-59219
35. The draft resolution called on Iran to address
those concerns and to fully respect its human rights
obligations in law and in practice, especially the
release of those who had been arbitrarily detained,
discrimination against women and other minority
groups, and ensuring free, fair and transparent
elections in 2013. It had also been called on to
cooperate fully with the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur and other human rights mechanisms. As the
only body responsible for international human rights
issues within the General Assembly, the Committee
must live up to its responsibilities of holding the
Government accountable for its serious human rights
violations.
36. Ms. Vadiati (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
the draft resolution reflected the short-sighted political
interests of a few countries and undermined the United
Nations human rights machinery. It was regrettable that
Canada and the United States of America consistently
committed human rights violations at home and
abroad. If Canada was truly concerned about human
rights situations, it would end the violence it
perpetrated against minority groups in that country.
37. Her delegation believed that the right way to
proceed lay in the determination of the countries
concerned to work together and create a favourable
environment based on common understanding and
respect for the promotion of human rights at all levels.
The draft resolution was politicized and should thus be
rejected.
38. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the draft resolution would be corrected to reflect
that Jordan was among its sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.52: Situation of Human
Rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
39. Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) said that Albania, Andorra,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Botswana, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Georgia,
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Poland, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Switzerland, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
40. The deteriorating situation of human rights in the
Syrian Arab Republic was mainly due to the
Government’s use of violence against its own people.
Tens of thousands, most of them civilians, had lost their
lives through the use of heavy weapons, air strikes,
massacres, extrajudicial executions and killings —
including of human rights defenders and journalists —
and torture. That required a swift response by the
General Assembly, in light of the level of the grave
crimes being committed. The evidence of crimes
against humanity had been put forward by several
independent reports.
41. The draft resolution called on Syrian authorities
to immediately end all crimes and violations against
civilians, and to deliver the necessary humanitarian and
medical assistance by cooperating with relevant United
Nations and international authorities.
42. Ms. Morgan-Moss (Panama) said that her
country should have been listed among the original
sponsors of the draft resolution.
43. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Colombia and Yemen joined the sponsors.
44. Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the
draft resolution did not protect rights in his country,
but was part of a media and political campaign to end
its independence and prevent it from forging ahead
with its national agenda. The war being launched
against his country within the United Nations
undermined Syrian sovereignty and independence and
ran counter to the United Nations Charter and
international law. The sponsors of the draft resolution,
especially Qatar and Saudi Arabia, were not models to
follow in the field of human rights.
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.31)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.31: Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
45. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
46. Ms. Klemetsdal (Norway), said that Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Colombia, Madagascar,
Micronesia (Federated States of), New Zealand, the
Republic of Korea, Spain, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia and Ukraine had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution.A/C.3/67/SR.38
12-59219 6
47. The draft resolution reaffirmed key humanitarian
principles, and focused on humanitarian response and
the work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It reflected the
need for a common commitment to protection and
finding solutions to people in need, and addressed key
issues such as birth registration, rescue at sea and
arbitrary detention.
48. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Honduras,
Malta, Paraguay, the Philippines, the Republic of
Moldova and Uganda had also joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution.
49. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.31 was adopted.
50. Mr. Mosot (Kenya) said that, as a nation which
continued to host refugees, Kenya had a unique
perspective on burden-sharing and helping to improve
the lives of refugees. His delegation had presented two
proposals during negotiations — one on safety and
security in refugee camps, and one on strengthened
language for the repatriation of refugees. Unfortunately,
those proposals, which had been made in New York, had
been rejected because they had not been introduced in
Geneva first. While it was welcome that the draft
resolution had been dealt with in both the Geneva and
New York offices, that two-station process needed
further refinement, in order to prevent substance from
being sacrificed at the altar of process in the future,
and ensure that such matters could be effectively
addressed.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/C.3/67/L.26/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.26/Rev.1: Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
51. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
52. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burkina
Faso, Mali, Panama, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, and
Ukraine and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia should have been included as sponsors in
the revised version of the draft resolution.
53. Ms. Kofoed (Denmark) said that Benin, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Israel, Madagascar,
Montenegro, Nicaragua, Niger, Paraguay, Peru, the
Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the
sponsors of the draft resolution. Article 5 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights stated that no
one should be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment; nevertheless,
there were continued reports of torture in all parts of the
world. She therefore hoped that the draft resolution,
which was the result of open-ended consultations with
delegations and a number of bilateral meetings, would
be adopted by consensus.
54. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.26/Rev.1 was
adopted.
55. Ms. Zografska-Krsteska (former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia), speaking on a point of order,
with reference to the request by the representative of
Egypt to reflect the official title and name of her
country as a co-sponsor to resolution A/C.3/67/L.54,
said that Security Council resolution 817 (1993) stated
that her country would be provisionally referred to
within the United Nations as “the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia” pending settlement of the
difference that had arisen over the State name.
Nevertheless, she wished to clarify that her country’s
official name, under its Constitution and also
confirmed by a judgment of the International Court of
Justice in December 2011, was “the Republic of
Macedonia”.
56. Mr. Iakovidis (Greece) reminded the Committee
that “the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia” was
the proper name of that country for all purposes within
the United Nations, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 817 and General Assembly resolution 225
(1993).
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.