United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.49
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
9 February 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-60366 (E)
*1160366*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 49th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 22 November 2011, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/66/SR.49
11-60366 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.11/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.11/Rev.1: Implementation
of the outcome of the World Summit for Social
Development and of the twenty-fourth special session
of the General Assembly
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Cesa (Argentina), speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, made the following oral
amendments to the draft resolution. In the second to
last line of the fourteenth preambular paragraph, the
phrase “in particular, agricultural subsidies” should be
deleted, and in paragraph 5, the word “crises” should
be replaced by the word “prices”.
3. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.11/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
4. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
the United States of America strongly supported the
goals set forth in the draft resolution, and was
committed to accelerating progress towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals, including Goal 1
on halving global hunger and poverty rates, by
investing in country plans to boost agricultural
development. Furthermore, his Government welcomed
the attention given in the draft resolution to the rights
of indigenous peoples, and echoed the call to promote
respect of all human rights and fundamental freedoms
in the context of development.
5. Nevertheless, his delegation reiterated its concern
that a better balance had not been struck in the analysis
of the relative impact of external and internal factors
on social development. The draft resolution also
mischaracterized the current state of financial markets
and food security issues. The international community
had long acknowledged that the primary responsibility
for social and economic development rested with
national Governments. While external economic
factors could certainly affect a country’s development,
it mattered more whether national domestic policies
responded to the aspirations of ordinary citizens,
provided them opportunities, removed obstacles to
broad-based economic growth and addressed their
needs. In the case of food security, solutions must not
only focus on external threats such as natural disasters
and trade distortion but also on domestic food security
issues such as lack of a domestic environment that
enabled investment in agriculture. The draft resolution
continued to overlook the need to retool domestic
policies to foster agricultural growth. Moreover, the
references in the text to food security and current
financial and economic issues were at odds with the
views of United Nations experts and many other
members of the world community, who agreed that the
world was not going currently going through a food
crisis.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection
of human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.57/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.57/Rev.1: Situation
of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
6. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme-budget implications.
7. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the main sponsors had requested that the following
corrections should be made to the draft resolution to
reflect the text as submitted to the Secretariat. In the
second line of the third preambular paragraph, the
words “Human Rights” should be added before the
words “Council resolution S-17/1 of 23 August 2011”.
In the same paragraph, the phrase “in which the
Council decided to dispatch urgently” should be
replaced with the phrase “which established an
independent international commission of inquiry”. In
the second line of the fourth preambular paragraph, the
words “of Arab States” should be added; the text would
read “the steps undertaken by the League of Arab
States.” He announced that Kuwait had joined the
sponsors.
8. Mr. Lyall Grant (United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland) said that the sponsors
had proposed the draft resolution in response to the
ongoing and widespread violence and human rights
violations that had persisted in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. Despite repeated calls
from the international community, the violence
continued, with the latest United Nations report
estimating that well over 3,500 civilians had been
killed to date. The Syrian authorities had refused to
allow a United Nations-mandated commission ofA/C.3/66/SR.49
3 11-60366
inquiry access and had failed to implement the plan of
action agreed on with the League of Arab States. Under
those circumstances, the international community
could not remain silent. The cross-regional draft
resolution, an initiative intended to respond to critical
events, called for the full implementation of the plan of
action in its entirety and without delay. It did not aim
at creating any new mechanisms or procedures, but to
send a strong signal that ongoing violations and
violence must come to an end.
9. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, reiterated its firm
position, expressed at various high-level meetings,
against the continued selectivity, politicization and
double standards reflected in country-specific
resolutions, which targeted developing countries that
were also members of the Movement. The alarming
increase in the adoption of such resolutions by the
General Assembly constituted a clear exploitation by
certain States of the question of human rights merely
for political ends and had a negative impact on the
credibility of United Nations efforts to promote and
protect human rights, which should be governed by the
principles of universality, non-selectivity and
objectivity. The Human Rights Council, and in
particular, the universal periodic review, constituted
the appropriate mechanisms for considering human
rights situations in all countries, based on constructive
dialogue. The Member States of the Non-Aligned
Movement would therefore vote against the draft
resolution and called on all other delegations to do so
as well.
10. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking on
a point of order, moved for the adjournment of the
debate on the draft resolution, based on the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. Country-specific
situations must be considered in the context of the
Human Rights Council’s universal periodic review ―
which his country had recently undergone ― not in the
Committee. His Government’s acceptance of a high
percentage of recommendations reflected its
commitment to promoting and protecting human rights
at the national level.
11. Recalling his country’s thousands of years of
history, its role in the birth and development of the
three monotheistic faiths and its steadfast opposition to
foreign interference in the affairs of sovereign States,
he noted that the Syrian Arab Republic had voted in
favour of granting independence to tens of former
colonies under Western rule ― countries that were
represented in the United Nations as equals alongside
their former colonizers. His country had never
withheld assistance to those seeking it, while others
had shied away from doing so out of cowardice, only
heeding limited political calculations.
12. Like any Member State, his country had some
problems, and reform was indeed called for in several
areas of political, economic and social life.
Nevertheless, such reforms would not come in the form
of suspiciously political draft resolutions sponsored by
certain Member States in order to blackmail others,
using the United Nations as a platform, nor by
conducting a media, political and diplomatic war
against the Syrian Arab Republic, or interfering in its
internal affairs. The best way to help the reform
process was for those States sponsoring the draft
resolution to halt their media campaigns against his
country, and to encourage armed opposition groups to
renounce violence and participate in the mechanisms
established to facilitate an inclusive national dialogue.
13. Unfortunately, every year a small number of
countries hijacked the work of the Committee to force
through their political objectives, which hindered the
Committee from achieving the goals set out in its work
on human rights. Some States sponsoring the draft
resolution were part of the reason violence continued
and was escalating in his country, as they were
fomenting sectarian strife and pushing the country to
the brink of civil war. He therefore wondered how
those States could call for the protection of human
rights of Syrian civilians, even as they were imposing
economic and financial sanctions against the Syrian
people, threatening to interrupt electricity and water
supply, and hosting in their capitals meetings of armed
Syrian opposition groups. Those groups had been
allowed to issue declarations publicly from their land
and claim responsibility for armed terrorist operations
against Government objectives and interests inside the
country.
14. The previous week, 90 people had been killed in
Syria in a single day; his Government was only now
making public the fact that 79 of them came from the
ranks of the armed forces. His Government was deeply
saddened by all the deaths and held those persons
stoking the flames of strife fully responsible. Yet his
delegation had not seen the same enthusiasm on the
part of the sponsors of the draft resolution for
pressuring Israel, the occupying Power, to end itsA/C.3/66/SR.49
11-60366 4
occupation of Arab territories, establishment of
settlements, and to establish a Palestinian State. The
double standard attested to political hypocrisy, moral
deficit and short-sightedness. Thousands of resolutions
and tens of fact-finding missions had come out of the
United Nations, all to no avail. The only part of any
resolution on the Arab-Israeli conflict that had been
implemented by Israel and its protectors was half of the
resolution on the partition of Palestine, while the other
half, regarding the establishment of a Palestinian State
in Palestine itself, had been forgotten.
15. His delegation called on Member States to realize
the danger of accusing States of committing human
rights violations, thus politicizing of the work of the
Committee and deviating from pursuit of the noble
goals and principles of human rights. He urged
Member States to search their consciences and show
their respect for human rights by upholding the truth,
namely, that his country merely strove to preserve its
sovereignty and bring about improvements in society
by undertaking Government-planned reforms that had
the endorsement and trust of the Syrian people. He
took pride in the fact that the Syrian Arab Republic had
achieved full independence and would not allow
colonial powers, past or present, to interfere in its
internal affairs again. For all those reasons, he urged
all delegations to vote in favour of the motion.
16. The Chair said that, under rule 116 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, he would give
the floor to two delegations in favour of the motion to
adjourn debate and two delegations that opposed it,
following which the motion would be immediately put
to the vote.
17. Ms. Medal (Nicaragua), speaking in favour of
the motion to adjourn consideration of draft resolution
A/C.3/66/L.57/Rev.1, expressed concern over the
increase in country-specific resolutions, which, rather
than promoting human rights, reflected selectivity,
politicization and double standards. Countries that
were genuinely concerned with the human rights
situations of others should first evaluate their own
situations and, if after doing so, they still felt morally
entitled to criticize others, they should proceed in a
spirit of respect and collaboration. While the Human
Rights Council remained the ideal tool for the
consideration of human rights issues, country-specific
resolutions adopted in the General Assembly had
proven ineffective and exacerbated adversarial
relations between Member States. Moreover, such
resolutions only targeted developing countries and
never their developed counterparts, despite the massive
human rights violations they committed. For that reason,
Nicaragua supported the no-action motion and called
on all countries, developing and developed alike, to
vote in favour of it, in the interest of non-interference
in the domestic affairs of sovereign States and
collaboration on promoting and protecting human
rights marked by mutual respect. Developed countries
had the opportunity to contribute to the promotion of
human rights by meeting their official development
assistance commitments, as extreme poverty inhibited
the effective exercise of all human rights.
18. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her country had a
traditional principled position against country-specific
resolutions, which accused countries selectively and on
the basis of political motivations that had nothing to do
with the defence of human rights. The establishment of
the Human Rights Council and its universal periodic
review mechanism had made it possible to consider
human rights situations in all countries in a just,
balanced and constructive manner. Therefore, her
delegation believed that consideration of the draft
resolution in the General Assembly was unjustified and
must be removed from the Committee’s agenda
immediately, being as it violated the principles of
respectful dialogue, international cooperation and
impartiality that must govern approaches to human
rights issues. The type of action being proposed
constituted a tool used by imperialist powers to defend
purely political interests. It was ironic that the
imperialists of the day proclaimed themselves
sacrosanct defenders of human rights, for the reality
exposed their double standards. She therefore called on
all States to vote in favour of the no-action motion,
regardless of their position on the draft resolution.
19. Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) said that the
situation in the sister nation of the Syrian Arab
Republic had reached a critical juncture and could not
be ignored. His Government had called on the Syrian
authorities to put an end to the violence and begin a
comprehensive dialogue and genuine reform. Saudi
Arabia had worked with other Arab countries to put in
place a comprehensive plan of action to resolve the
Syrian crisis, preserve Syria’s security and safety,
protect its sovereignty and spare it the dangers of
foreign intervention. The Syrian Government hadA/C.3/66/SR.49
5 11-60366
initially agreed to the plan but had then reverted to
obstructing its implementation.
20. His delegation fully grasped the great role that
Syria had played throughout its long and distinguished
history and appreciated the sacrifices made by the
Syrian people and its support for peoples struggling to
liberate themselves. For that reason, voting to adjourn
the debate on the draft resolution would send the
message to the Syrian people that the international
community valued neither their suffering nor the blood
spilled by their children, a message unworthy of the
United Nations and its Member States. The draft
resolution was not country-specific but rather dealt
with a unique situation that his delegation hoped would
not recur. Saudi Arabia therefore called on Member
States to vote against the motion to adjourn the debate
so that the international community’s honest opinion
on the draft resolution might be voiced, particularly
since it affirmed the Arab Initiative of the League of
Arab States. The Initiative focused on the need to end
the cycle of violence in Syria, whatever its source, to
protect human rights and to preserve Syrian unity and
sovereignty, avoiding foreign intervention in its
internal affairs.
21. Mr. Araud (France) said that the draft resolution
was not a country-specific resolution but rather a
unique initiative justified by the urgency of the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, which continued
to deteriorate, with that country rejecting the peace
plan proposed by the League of Arab States and the
number of victims steadily rising. A vote to adjourn the
debate on the draft resolution would be tantamount to
denying the urgency and the need for the draft
resolution, which had the support of various countries
in the region. The short text called for an end to
violence and support for the initiative of the League of
Arab States. His country would therefore vote against
the motion so as to reject the attempt to end the debate
on such a crucial question.
22. A recorded vote was taken on the motion for the
adjournment of debate concerning draft resolution
A/C.3/66/L.57/Rev.1.
In favour:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ecuador, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Dominican Republic, Ghana,
Guyana, India, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho,
Malaysia, Mali, Mozambique, Nepal, Pakistan,
Philippines, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Republic
of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia.
23. The motion was rejected by 118 votes to 20, with
29 abstentions.
24. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) said that
one of his colleagues ― whose delegation he wouldA/C.3/66/SR.49
11-60366 6
not refer to by name out of respect for their shared
Arab traditions ― had called on all armed parties in
the Syrian Arab Republic to stop the violence. While
his Government would endorse that stance, the draft
resolution being considered was devoid of any
comparable political balance and took a hostile
position on the issue of stability in the country.
Moreover, the country from which his colleague hailed
was hosting a Salafi satellite television network that
was working without interruption to foment sectarian
strife among Syrians.
25. First and foremost, his delegation questioned the
allusion to the Charter of the United Nations in the
draft resolution, given that the sponsors had effectively
violated the sanctity of the Charter by disregarding the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. It was also surprising that the sponsors were
inviting the Syrian authorities to implement the plan of
action of the League of Arab States on the situation in
his country, when his country had already signed the
document and welcomed the committee in charge of
following up the initiative. His Government had also
accepted the draft protocol adopted by the ministerial
meeting of the League, which called for sending a
mission to verify the implementation of the plan of
action and to evaluate the situation in his country
firsthand, away from the media disinformation
campaigns. However, the draft resolution neglected to
mention the armed groups that jeopardized the security
of citizens and property, something any sovereign State
would categorically refuse to accept. It was ironic that
some of the sponsors accused those resisting foreign
occupation in Iraq, Lebanon, Palestine, the occupied
Syrian Golan and elsewhere of terrorism, and insisted
that no terrorist groups were active in Syria, even as
the heads of those groups had made public declarations
and confessions of their deeds. Those States refused to
recognize the existence of armed groups because it was
they who were responsible for arming, financing and
protecting them.
26. It was no secret that the United States of America
was the chief instigator and mastermind of the political
campaign against his country. Ultimately, the draft
resolution had nothing to do with human rights and
was simply part of its hostile policy towards the Syrian
Arab Republic.
27. His delegation had transmitted to the Secretary-
General, the President of the Security Council and the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee a
detailed letter identifying the persons responsible for
smuggling weapons into the Syrian Arab Republic
from neighbouring countries, their crimes, the types of
weapons smuggled and the number of persons killed.
In addition to that document (S/2011/707), his
delegation was reporting to the Secretary-General and
to the Security Council on the steps taken towards
reform, including the release of thousands of detainees
not guilty of shedding blood and the establishment of
national commissions of enquiry into some of the
abuses that occurred against civilians. Nevertheless,
the draft resolution regrettably omitted all information
provided by his Government and instead took a
selective and blatantly deceptive approach. The
sponsors of the draft resolution had a poor record in the
area of human rights; European countries and the
United States of America continued to invade and
impose unilateral economic sanctions on developing
countries, thus depriving them of their rights to live in
peace and security and to development. Against that
backdrop, he wondered how the sponsors could defend
human rights given their own fundamental failure to
protect the human rights of women, foreigners,
religious minorities and other groups.
28. The United States of America, France, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Germany, Canada and the European countries
sponsoring the draft resolution had punished and were
still punishing the Palestinian people for exercising
their choice in a democratic electoral process, and were
complicit in crimes against humanity through their
silence on and support of Israeli occupation of Arab
territories and massacres of Arab peoples. However,
some sponsors were not aware that they were helping
the plans of others by drawing attention away from the
Israeli occupation and preventing the establishment of
a Palestinian State. The threat of the United States and
some European countries to cut off aid to Palestinians
if they submitted their legitimate request for full
membership in the United Nations attested to the ill
will of the sponsors towards his country and their
desire to pressure it into changing its strategic political
choices, and exposed the aim of the resolution as a
patently political one. His delegation therefore called
on Member States with a conscience to support both
the Syrian State and people, acknowledge its right to
make its own democratic choices, and reject any
foreign interference in its internal affairs. He invited
those countries to put a stop to the plot, the existence
of which was becoming more apparent with everyA/C.3/66/SR.49
7 11-60366
irresponsible statement made by the foreign ministers
of several of the States sponsoring the draft resolution.
29. The promotion by some sponsors of the demands
of the radical Syrian opposition, namely, overthrow of
the regime by force, was a coup attempt supported
from abroad, not a reform process; the United Nations
must never support such a project. In that connection,
he wondered whether the statements by some leaders
and foreign ministers of States Members of the United
Nations calling for the ouster of the Syrian president
might be considered a flagrant violation of
international law and of the Charter of the United
Nations, not to mention a gross interference in Syrian
internal affairs and incitement of the Syrian street
against the legitimate leadership and national dialogue.
The “Arab Spring” was merely a reformulation of the
Sykes-Picot colonial convention to build the so-called
“New Middle East”, an entity led by Israel and
intended to replace what was known as the Arab
nation, based on the fragmentation of the region’s
countries along sectarian, ethnic and religious lines.
That transformation would pave the way for a new
ethnic cleansing against the Palestinians in their
homeland and prevent the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State.
30. The draft resolution and the ridiculous plots and
manoeuvres against his country would not deter it from
moving forward on reform and protecting the Syrian
people from foreign interference and ambitions. The
Syrian Arab Republic was determined to uphold and
promote the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
its people and to continue its role in enhancing
international cooperation on human rights issues. In
light of the above, he requested a recorded vote on the
draft resolution and hoped that all Member States
would oppose it.
31. Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that, as a member of the Non-Aligned Movement and
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, his Government
opposed country-specific resolutions in the Committee.
Country-specific situations should be addressed
through the appropriate United Nations mechanisms,
including the universal periodic review ― a process in
which the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic had
cooperated.
32. The Committee’s undertaking of country-specific
resolutions led it down the same path of politicization
as the now-defunct Human Rights Commission,
hindering the promotion and protection of human
rights. It was only through cooperation and dialogue, in
a way that ensured equality and the sovereign rights of
States, rather than through pressure and mischievous
intentions, that those rights could be ensured. His
delegation would thus vote against the draft resolution.
33. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her Government
rejected the selective singling out of countries under
the pretext of defending human rights. Country-
specific resolutions were being used to fulfil political
agendas and satisfy neo-colonial desires for the market
domination of other countries’ resources. Some powers
were using the noble principles of human rights for the
sole purpose of geopolitical domination. Transparency
and cooperation were key to ensuring the promotion
and protection of human rights. In that respect, her
Government applauded the efforts made by the Syrian
Arab Republic to engage in dialogue with the
opposition. Outside interference was regrettable; the
matter under consideration fell under the purview of
the Human Rights Council and its universal periodic
review, not the Committee. Cooperation, impartiality,
respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty must
underpin any action undertaken for the promotion and
protection of human rights. Diplomacy should be used
for peace, not war. Venezuela would thus be voting
against the draft resolution, and urged all delegations
to do the same.
34. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that her
country rejected country-specific resolutions because
they were politically-motivated and unrelated to human
rights. It was that very harmful and selective practice
of double standards on human rights issues which had
led to the dissolution of the Human Rights Commission.
The universal periodic review was the mechanism for
examining countries’ human rights situations on equal
footing and through constructive dialogue. International
cooperation based on the principles of objectivity,
non-conditionality and non-selectivity was the only
way to protect human rights. Unfortunately, that was
not the purpose of the draft resolution, which reflected
clear political motivations. Cuba would thus be voting
against it.
35. Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that his Government rejected the draft
resolution and was deeply concerned about the
continuing practice of selectivity and country-specificA/C.3/66/SR.49
11-60366 8
resolutions. It was with objectivity, impartiality and
non-selectivity that human rights should be considered,
and in the framework of the universal periodic review,
on equal footing. Such country-specific resolutions
were politically motivated and used human rights as a
pretext when the true aim was to pressure the
developing countries they targeted, including his own
country. That approach was regrettable and must be
stopped. His delegation strongly opposed the draft
resolution and would be voting against it.
36. At the request of the delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.57/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Against:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam,
Cameroon, China, Comoros, Congo, Dominican
Republic, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada, India, Kenya,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Malaysia, Mali, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen,
Zambia.
37. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/57/Rev.1 was adopted
by 122 votes to 13, with 41 abstentions.
38. Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine) said that his
delegation had voted in favour of the draft resolution,
on the understanding that in paragraph two, the call for
an immediate end to all violence in the Syrian Arab
Republic referred to all parties involved in the
confrontation.
39. Mr. Wang Min (China) said that his delegation
had always maintained that human rights matters were
best addressed through constructive dialogue and
cooperation rather than through pressure and country-
specific resolutions. His Government called on the
Syrian Arab Republic to put an end to the violence and
establish order through a balanced process. It endorsed
the Plan of action of the League of Arab States. For
those reasons, China had voted in favour of the no-
action motion and had abstained on the draft
resolution.
40. Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam) said that his
delegation had voted against the draft resolution
because his Government did not support country-
specific resolutions. At the same time, it was concerned
about the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic and
called on all parties there to put an end to the violence
and conflict, and engage in constructive and peaceful
dialogue.
41. Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia) said that his delegation
had abstained from the vote. It took note that the
Syrian Arab Republic had taken steps to engage with
the international community, including through its
participation in the universal periodic review process.A/C.3/66/SR.49
9 11-60366
Malaysia firmly believed in adopting a
non-confrontational approach on all matters, including
human rights, and in respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Human rights should not be
politicized, including through the selective targeting of
countries. The Government of the Syrian Arabic
Republic had a positive role to play in the process, and
the best approach the international community could
take was to engage in cooperative and constructive
dialogue.
42. Mr. Prosor (Israel) said that his Government
supported the draft resolution. The Syrian delegation’s
attacks on his country were an attempt to divert
attention away from the matter at hand, which was of
serious concern. Israel stood ready to engage with
other countries in the Middle East to promote peace,
stability and freedom.
43. Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) said that his delegation
had voted in favour of the draft resolution as an
expression of Egypt’s support, based on its own
revolution of 25 January 2011, for the demands by the
Syrian people for fundamental reforms that would
enable them to live in freedom, dignity and democracy,
to achieve better living standards and to ensure the full
respect of the rule of law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Moreover, the text of the draft
resolution had been made more consistent with the
position adopted by the Council of the League of Arab
States at the Foreign Minister level at its two meetings
on 12 and 16 November 2011. The draft was thus based
on the full and immediate implementation of the Plan
of Action of the League of Arab States, calling, inter
alia, for the immediate cessation of military actions
and the dispatch of an observer mission to the Syrian
Arab Republic. It was also based on ensuring the
honest implementation of Human Rights Council
resolutions S-16/1 of 29 April and S-17/1 of 22 August,
including for guaranteeing cooperation of the Syrian
authorities with the independent fact-finding mission.
44. Lastly, the draft resolution helped preserve the
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic and could not be interpreted as an invitation
for foreign intervention. That was made clear in the
recently added eighth preambular paragraph which
stated that all States Members of the United Nations
should refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State or act in any other
manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United
Nations ― a clear assertion of the importance of
reaching a comprehensive political settlement on the
deteriorating situation in the country.
45. Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) said that his
country had consistently opposed unilateral country-
specific resolutions as they did not help to resolve
human rights situations. States themselves had the
primary responsibility of ensuring the protection and
promotion of human rights while it fell to the
international community to provide them with
technical assistance. It was such assistance, and not
mentoring, that the Syrian Arab Republic needed more
than ever. The violence in that country must be ended
and national dialogue on democratic processes stepped
up. Nevertheless, the Syrian authorities’ efforts to
improve the situation in the country should not be
overlooked, and they should be given the opportunity
to resolve the situation for themselves. It was thus
inadmissible to use force or intervention in the Syrian
Arab Republic. The human rights situation in any
country could be a source of concern for the
international community. However, those issues should
not be used as a pretext for interference in State affairs.
His delegation had thus abstained from the vote.
46. Mr. Srivali (Singapore) said that his Government
maintained a position of principle against country-
specific resolutions. Nevertheless, its abstention from
the vote should not be interpreted as its taking a
position on the human rights situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, or as condoning the mistreatment of
citizens. He called on all States to promote and protect
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
citizens.
47. Ms. Andamo (Thailand) said that her
Government had serious concerns about the violence
that was occurring in the Syrian Arab Republic and
hoped that stability and a long-term solution could be
found, and that the recommendations from the
universal periodic review could be implemented as
soon as possible. Thailand had abstained in the vote on
the basis of its opposition to country-specific
resolutions and because the Human Rights Council and
universal periodic review were the most appropriate
mechanisms for addressing the matter.
48. Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) said that his delegation
had voted in favour of the draft resolution because of
its concern over the grave human rights violations in
the Syrian Arab Republic, and maintained itsA/C.3/66/SR.49
11-60366 10
principled position of voting against any no-action
motion, as that mechanism impeded the international
community’s ability to consider matters of interest to
Member States. The Human Rights Council was the
competent body for addressing the situation and must
be given a prominent role in that regard. It had the
tools needed to examine specific cases of concern. His
delegation had thus not been a sponsor of the draft
resolution. It supported the universal periodic review,
which was the appropriate mechanism for the regular
review of country situations and could strengthen the
Human Rights Council as the highest authority within
the United Nations for promoting and protecting
human rights throughout the world. Nevertheless, the
international community had a responsibility to
denounce systematic abuse or violations of human
rights anywhere in the world as they occurred, and if
necessary, to address them specifically.
49. Mr. Fiallo (Ecuador) said that the Committee was
not the appropriate forum for addressing country-
specific situations, which were best left to the Human
Rights Council and its universal periodic review
mechanism. Therefore his Government had supported
the no-action motion and endorsed the statement made
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. Ecuador
adhered to universality, impartiality and non-selectivity
in considering human rights matters and believed that
specific countries should not be targeted. All States
must refrain from threatening territorial integrity and
from politicization. Only dialogue would enable
effective resolution. For those reasons, Ecuador had
voted against the draft resolution.
50. The Chair suggested that before concluding the
consideration of agenda item 69 as a whole, the
Committee should, in accordance with General
Assembly decision 55/488, take note of the following
documents: Report of the Human Rights Committee
(A/66/40); Report of the Committee against Torture
(A/66/44); Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Voluntary Fund on Contemporary
Forms of Slavery (A/66/217); Report of the Secretary-
General on measures to improve further the
effectiveness, harmonization and reform of the treaty
body system (A/66/344); Report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Victims of Torture (A/66/276); Note by the Secretary-
General submitting the report of the Chairs for the
human rights treaty bodies on their twenty-third
meeting (A/66/175); Note by the Secretary-General on
the Special Fund established by the Optional Protocol
to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(A/66/259); Report of the Secretary-General on the
draft programme of activities for the International Year
for People of African Descent (A/66/342); Report of
the Secretary-General on the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance (A/66/284); Note by the Secretary-
General transmitting the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons (A/66/285); Note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
(A/66/330); Note by the Secretary-General transmitting
the interim report of the Special Rapporteur on the
independence of judges and lawyers (A/66/289); Note
by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children (A/66/283); Note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the interim report of the
Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health (A/66/254); Note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the report of the
independent expert on the effects of foreign debt and
other related international financial obligations of
States on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
particularly economic, social and cultural rights
(A/66/271); Note by the Secretary-General transmitting
the report of the Special Rapporteur on adequate
housing as a component of the right to an adequate
standard of living and on the right to
non-discrimination in this context (A/66/270); Note by
the Secretary-General transmitting the interim report of
the Special Rapporteur on the right to education
(A/66/269); Note by the Secretary-General transmitting
the report of the Special Rapporteur on extreme
poverty and human rights (A/66/265); Note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression (A/66/290);
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report
of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967
(A/66/358); Reports of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the international
independent commission of inquiry on the situation of
human rights in Côte d’Ivoire (A/66/518); Report ofA/C.3/66/SR.49
11 11-60366
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (A/66/36).
51. It was so decided.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons
and the family (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.10/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.10/Rev.1: High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Realization
of the Millennium Development Goals and Other
Internationally Agreed Development Goals
for Persons with Disabilities
52. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
making a statement, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, on the
programme budget implications of paragraphs 2, 3(a)
and 4 of the draft resolution, said that, with regard to
paragraphs 2 and 3(a), it was envisaged that the high-
level meeting would comprise one opening plenary
meeting from 10:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m., followed by an
informal interactive round table until 1 p.m., and
another interactive round table from 3 p.m. to
5:30 p.m. followed by a short closing plenary until
6 p.m. on 23 September 2013. That comprised two
meetings in total, requiring interpretation services in
all six official languages and verbatim record service
for the plenary meetings only. The requirements for
those and related support services would be covered by
the budgetary provisions provided to service the
General Assembly on the understanding that there
would be no parallel meetings of the General Assembly
or its Working Groups.
53. As for paragraph 4, it was estimated that
additional requirements of $100,100 would arise to
process two documents with a total estimated 17,000
words into all six languages. The Secretary-General
would make every effort to absorb the costs within the
provision in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2012-2013, through more efficient use of
resources available.
54. Regarding the wording “within existing
resources” in paragraphs 2 and 4, attention was drawn
to the provisions of section IV of General Assembly
resolution 45/248 B of 21 December 1990 and
subsequent resolutions, the most recent of which was
resolution 64/243 of 24 December 2009.
55. Therefore, should the draft resolution be adopted
by the General Assembly, no additional programme
budget implications would arise for the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013.
56. Ms. Maduhu (United Republic of Tanzania),
speaking also on behalf of the Philippines, said that
Argentina, Cameroon, Canada, Ecuador, Ghana,
Guatemala, India, Iceland, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi,
Mali, Mauritius, Morocco, Namibia, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Qatar, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, the United States of America, Viet Nam
and Zambia had joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
57. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Benin, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Chad, the Comoros,
Guinea, Jamaica, Japan, Lebanon, Maldives, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Nicaragua, the Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda,
Senegal, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine and Zimbabwe had also joined the
sponsors.
58. Ms. Grabianowska (Poland), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that the European Union
was committed to the main objective of the draft
resolution and hoped that the agreed modalities could
lead to substantive discussion and push forward the
agenda of persons with disabilities. It had been
disappointing that, in the discussion on modalities,
some States had expressed a reluctance to ensure the
full participation of civil society at the high-level
meeting, whereas maintaining a strong and open
dialogue with civil society groups within the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly would be important
for the high-level discussion. The European Union had
consistently maintained that the process of admission
of non-governmental organizations to participate in the
high-level meeting should be transparent and allow for
their full involvement. It interpreted paragraph 7 to
mean that, within the Assembly, Member States would
be able to challenge objections by other States to the
presence of civil society representatives or particular
non-governmental organizations. That was one reason
it had been unable to sponsor the draft resolution.
Member States should adopt a more constructive
approach in future discussions on civil society
participation at the United Nations.A/C.3/66/SR.49
11-60366 12
59. Ms. Hernando (Philippines), speaking also on
behalf of Tanzania and the other co-sponsors, said that
the sponsors had endeavoured to draft a balanced text
that would enjoy the broadest possible support.
60. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.10/Rev.1 was
adopted.
61. The Chair suggested that before concluding the
consideration of agenda item 27 as a whole, the
Committee should, in accordance with General
Assembly decision 55/488, take note of the Report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
World Summit for Social Development and of the
twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly
(A/66/124), and the Report of the Secretary-General on
the world social situation 2011: the global social crisis
(A/66/226).
62. It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.