United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.22
GeneralAssembly Distr.: General
29 January 2009
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-57032 (E)
*0957032*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 22nd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 21 October 2009, at 10 a.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representativesA/C.3/64/SR.22
09-57032 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/64/81)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (A/64/159, A/64/160, A/64/170,
A/64/171, A/64/175, A/64/181, A/64/186,
A/64/187, A/64/188, A/64/209, A/64/211,
A/64/211/Corr.1, A/64/213, A/64/213/ Corr.1,
A/64/214, A/64/216, A/64/219, A/64/226,
A/64/255, A/64/256, A/64/265, A/64/272,
A/64/273, A/64/279, A/64/289, A/64/290,
A/64/293, A/64/304, A/64/320 and A/64/333)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (A/64/224,
A/64/318, A/64/319, A/64/328, A/64/334 and
A/64/357)
1. Ms. Pillay (High Commissioner for Human
Rights), introducing her annual report (A/64/36), said
that it was important to implement the Member State
commitments to combat racial discrimination
reaffirmed in the outcome document adopted by
consensus at the Durban Review Conference. To follow
up on the Conference, a special task force had been
charged with mainstreaming the anti-racism agenda
into all of the activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other United
Nations entities. She looked forward to the
endorsement of the outcome document and allocation
by the General Assembly of the necessary resources for
the follow-up programme of work.
2. Despite progress made against discrimination on
the grounds of sex, more must be done to strengthen
the integration of women’s rights into the work of the
Office of the High Commissioner, and the activities of
the new gender entity must be coordinated with
relevant human rights mechanisms. The recent
adoption by the Security Council of resolutions 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009) was welcome, given that the
Office of the High Commissioner had made protection
of human rights, and particularly women’s rights in
situations of armed conflict, violence and insecurity, a
priority.
3. She encouraged Member States to sign and ratify
the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. She also
advocated a human rights approach in response to the
food, economic and financial crises, as well as in
response to climate change.
4. The Office of the High Commissioner was
working through partnerships with relevant
international organizations and institutions to ensure
that the right to development was integrated into their
policies and strategies. Human rights should also be
included in national policies aimed at alleviating
poverty and implementing the Millennium
Development Goals. Through participation in the
United Nations Global Compact, her Office had
contributed to the development of practical measures to
enhance private sector knowledge and integration of
human rights.
5. The Office of the High Commissioner had
advanced the implementation of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples by
carrying out country-specific initiatives, promoting
indigenous entitlement to ancestral lands, the need of
indigenous people to be involved in decisions
regarding the industrial exploitation of their natural
resources and the right to education.
6. Respect for human rights obligations must be at
the centre of migration policies; her Office took a
rights-based approach to the issue of human trafficking
placing the interests of victims at the forefront.
7. The Office had continued to provide substantive
support to the Human Rights Council, particularly in
the context of the Universal Periodic Review. As a
result of the process, various countries under review
had firmly pledged to strengthen implementation
human rights standards and cooperate with human
rights mechanisms. It was important to strengthen the
ties between the Universal Periodic Review, treaty
bodies and special procedures mandate holders,
currently 39 in number, so that the review would lead
to specific measures. The review of the Council’s work
in 2010-2011 should lead to improvements in its
working methods and address unresolved issues. She
urged States to benefit from the work of the treaty
bodies, and, in particular, from their prevention
capabilities. While the human rights protection system
was successful overall, States parties and other
stakeholders should reflect on how to strengthen the
treaty bodies and promote better coordination and
coherence among those mechanisms.A/C.3/64/SR.22
3 09-57032
8. Because field-oriented capacities played a crucial
role in the work of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, a regional office for
Europe had recently been opened, and a Rapid
Response Unit, deployed in crisis situations, had been
established. The field presences had assisted national
human rights protection institutions to forge strong
partnerships among themselves and had facilitated
their interactions with United Nations mechanisms,
including the Universal Periodic Review.
9. In its efforts to strengthen access to justice and
ensure the harmonization of domestic legislation and
procedures with international human rights law, the
Office was developing guidance tools and carrying out
capacity-building activities in the area of transitional
justice. In the near future, the High Commissioner
would address the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
underlining the need to uphold human rights in the
fight against terrorism.
10. In the context of efforts to mainstream human
rights in the United Nations system, the Office had
built a strong partnership with United Nations
development agencies. It also continued to focus on
enhancing the integration of human rights in all peace
missions and special political missions.
11. The Office had identified six thematic priorities
which would guide its work in the next biennium. The
credibility of human rights work depended on a
commitment to truth, impartiality and integrity, with no
tolerance for double standards.
12. Ms. Sapag (Chile), welcoming the high priority
which the High Commissioner attached to the
protection of the rights of women and girls, as well as
her intervention at the panel entitled Equality Before
the Law: Concrete Steps to Further Women’s Equality,
organized by Chile in Geneva on 4 June 2009, asked
for her views on the establishment of a special
mechanism to address the inequality of women before
the law and to strengthen efforts by States in that
regard.
13. Ms. Blum (Colombia) said that her delegation
welcomed the priority given to elimination of racial,
gender and religious discrimination by the High
Commissioner, as well as the elimination of
discrimination targeting marginalized groups, the
protection of economic, social and cultural rights and
the fight against inequality and poverty. Colombia had
successfully presented a draft resolution in the Human
Rights Council on the elimination of discrimination
against women and was currently circulating a draft
resolution aimed at revitalizing United Nations efforts
to benefit people of African descent.
14. Colombia welcomed international observers and
appreciated international cooperation in the area of
human rights, in line with its policy of zero tolerance
for human rights violations. Given that cooperation
with the Office of the High Commissioner had been
highly beneficial in helping Colombia to make
progress on the protection of human rights, she asked
for further information on the High Commissioner’s
priority areas and mechanisms for cooperation with
States, human rights institutions and civil society
organizations.
15. Mr. Dahab (Sudan) said that it was heartening
that the High Commissioner would be guided by a
commitment to truth, impartiality and integrity. Her
work to enhance the right to development had his
delegation’s support, particularly since the Millennium
Development Goals had yet to be realized. The
adoption of the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights was
welcome. However, the justiciability of those rights
had not been established.
16. The Office of the High Commissioner should pay
more attention to the issue of climate change, which
affected many countries and triggered conflicts. Given
the overlapping functions of human rights mechanisms
in developing countries and the absence of such
mechanisms in developed countries, the establishment
of a regional Office in Europe was most welcome.
17. Regarding the fight against impunity, he said that
international criminal jurisdiction should not be a
political tool in the hands of a few countries. It must
serve justice and equality and contribute positively to
the cause of world peace.
18. Ms. Xu Jing (China) said that her delegation
hoped that the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Human Rights Council would
pay greater real attention to the promotion and
protection of economic, social and cultural rights,
which were often overlooked in comparison to civil
and political rights, as well as to the right to
development, and would take practical measures to
implement the Millennium Development Goals.
Further information about the High Commissioner’s
ideas and plans in that regard would be appreciated.A/C.3/64/SR.22
09-57032 4
19. The Office of the High Commissioner should
strengthen coordination with the Human Rights
Council in implementing the outcome document of the
Durban Review Conference; it would be interesting to
hear her views on its implementation. In 2010, the
Human Rights Council would conduct a review of its
status, and, in that connection, it might consider
improving and strengthening its supervision of the
work of the Office of the High Commissioner, which
should be guided by the principles of neutrality,
objectivity and impartiality, in strict compliance with
the mandate given by the General Assembly. The
Council should promote international cooperation and
dialogue on human rights while avoiding
confrontation.
20. While the Office had made efforts to diversify the
composition of its staff, imbalances in geographical
representation remained. China hoped that the Office
would take the practical measures recommended in the
second follow-up to the management review of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights by the Joint Inspection Unit (A/64/96),
and would report in a timely manner to the Human
Rights Council on progress made.
21. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, commended the High
Commissioner’s proactive and independent approach.
With reference to plans to harmonize the working
methods of the treaty bodies, she requested further
details regarding how the Office intended to improve
follow-up procedures and the next steps for
mainstreaming human rights into the policies and
practices of the United Nations. She also wished to
know how States could best support the High
Commissioner’s efforts.
22. The European Union welcomed the strengthening
of the Rapid Response Unit of the Office of the High
Commissioner and was encouraged by the deployment
of a human rights adviser to Honduras. While it was
understood that the High Commissioner could not yet
present the results of the fact-finding mission, an
assessment of the impact of the deployment on the
Organization’s ability to monitor a situation of concern
to many Member States would be of interest.
23. In the context of combating impunity, she asked
how States could support United Nations efforts to
ensure that parties to conflict were held accountable for
possible violations.
24. Recalling the positions of the European Union on
the issues of torture, the death penalty, and freedom of
expression and conscience, she asked if there were any
activities planned to address those issues in the coming
year. The European Union looked forward to pursuing
an intensified dialogue with the Office on a broad
range of issues through the regional office in Brussels
established in October.
25. Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein) said that not
enough had been done in the area of implementation of
the numerous human rights standards which were being
created. It would be helpful to know what the High
Commissioner thought her Office could do in that
regard. While the Universal Periodic Review was
certainly a useful tool, it was still too early to make a
determination about its effectiveness, before a full
round of reviews had been completed. National
judiciaries would now play a more important role in
the fight against impunity. Information on the role to
be played by the office in Geneva in that regard would
be appreciated.
26. Ms. Rasheed (Palestine) said that while there had
been countless United Nations reports and resolutions
on actions committed against the Palestinian people by
Israel in violation of international law, as well as
appeals launched by the High Commissioner and other
high-ranking officials, there had been no real
implementation. She asked what the international
community should do to ensure that the Goldstone
Report, which documented the tragic consequences of
the savage military aggression launched by Israel
against the Gaza Strip on 27 December 2008 would not
suffer the same fate, and to put an end to the culture of
impunity prevailing in Israel.
27. Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) said that, in his view,
the evaluation of the Human Rights Council provided
for in General Assembly resolution 60/251, to take
place by March 2011, should be characterized by
complementarity between the United Nations offices in
Geneva and New York; he would like to hear the High
Commissioner’s views on that matter. The Universal
Periodic Review had been a success because by the end
of 2009, half of the Member States would have
undergone it. Just the fact that it ensured
implementation of the recommendations of the treaty
bodies provided significant added value.
28. His delegation encouraged the High Commissioner
to continue the process of reflection on the content andA/C.3/64/SR.22
5 09-57032
scope of freedom of expression as laid out in the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It
supported the High Commissioner’s commitment to
promote the right to development, whose importance
had increased due to the economic crisis.
29. Ms. Taylor (New Zealand) said that her
delegation fully supported the independence and
integrity of the High Commissioner and appreciated
her work to mainstream human rights into the work of
the United Nations at all levels. Further details on what
additional concrete measures could be taken to enhance
her access to other United Nations bodies, including
the Security Council, would be of interest.
30. With regard to the impact of climate change on
human rights, it would be helpful to know how her
Office, which had recently published a study on that
subject, could further add value to the discussion, in
particular in regard to the problems faced by small
island developing States.
31. Ms. Gendi (Egypt) said that her delegation was
grateful that the High Commissioner was emphasizing
the right to development and economic, social and
cultural rights, which had long been overlooked. She
asked for information on programmes in those areas
planned by the Office.
32. Following upon the question posed by the
representative of Palestine, she requested additional
information on the fact-finding mission in Gaza and
elsewhere in the occupied Palestinian territories and on
the support by the Office of the High Commissioner to
the Goldstone Report.
33. Her delegation also requested more information
about programmes to combat trafficking in persons as
well as how the Office saw coordination of its work
with other United Nations human rights mechanisms,
including the United Nations gender architecture and
various rapporteurs and special representatives.
34. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) requested information on
follow-up to the expert seminar on freedom of
expression and advocacy of religious hatred
constituting incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence held in October 2008. He also asked about the
involvement of the Office of the High Commissioner in
various interreligious and intercultural dialogue
initiatives.
35. With regard to the impartiality of special
procedures mandate holders, he asked how the High
Commissioner planned to ensure their adherence to the
Code of Conduct adopted by the Human Rights
Council so that they demonstrated restraint, moderation
and discretion in order not to undermine the
independent nature of their mandate.
36. Mr. Mohamed (Maldives), referring to Human
Rights Council resolutions 7/23 and 10/4, said that his
delegation was heartened by the fact that States had
recognized that climate change undermined a range of
internationally protected human rights. However, he
regretted that they had been unable to decide whether
the impacts of climate change could be classified as
human rights violations and what national-level
obligations were applicable to the issue of climate
change. The intent of the two resolutions had been to
show that parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change had a clear moral and
legal obligation to protect those rights by reaching an
ambitious and effective agreement at the United
Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen.
His delegation would study carefully the outcome of
that meeting and relevant work done by the special
procedures mandate holders and treaty bodies before
deciding on next steps, especially in the context of the
unanswered questions mentioned earlier.
37. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) welcomed the
high priority the High Commissioner gave to the
human rights of migrants. She had set the goal of
increasing the presence of the Office on the ground and
strengthening its capacity to provide technical
assistance to States, and since 2001 Mexico had
benefited from the presence of a regional office. He
asked what results had been achieved thus far and what
initiatives there were in that area.
38. Ms. Sicade (United States of America) expressed
appreciation for the work done by the Office of the
High Commissioner in the field and for the priorities
she had outlined. Further information was requested on
where she saw weaknesses in international human
rights mechanisms and her proposals to strengthen
international human rights mechanisms, as well as on
what Member States and civil society could do to help
and to maintain the independence of the mechanism.
39. Ms. Hendrie (United Kingdom) emphasized that
the High Commissioner’s independence, was the basis
of her credibility, and agreed that civil society was one
of the keys to change on the ground. The United
Kingdom would present an update on progress byA/C.3/64/SR.22
09-57032 6
Member States in implementing recommendations in
March 2010, and hoped to be able to report specific
evidence. The Universal Periodic Review
complemented other parts of the United Nations human
rights machinery and was an effective catalyst for
implementation. The field presences of the Office of
the High Commissioner were an integral part of the
United Nations early warning system. The partnerships
established by the Office with many countries were
welcomed. Views on the key achievements arising
from the involvement of the Office in Nepal would be
appreciated, as would further details about the High
Commissioner’s work on mainstreaming human rights
throughout the United Nations system.
40. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that
unfortunately, the High Commissioner had not
mentioned the violations committed by Israel in the
occupied Arab territories, despite the adoption of the
Goldstone Report by the Human Rights Council. Her
delegation appreciated the priorities stated by the High
Commissioner, but wondered what she intended to do
to protect human rights in armed conflict, and in
particular, given her commitment to maintain neutrality
and fairness, regarding the protection of the rights of
people under foreign occupation.
41. Mr. Tarar (Pakistan) said that his delegation
acknowledged the sincere efforts of the High
Commissioner to rectify the geographical imbalance in
her Office. However, the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit (A/64/94) had revealed that the composition of
the Office continued to reflect a serious imbalance
against developing countries. He requested further
information on how she planned to rectify the
imbalance during the second year of her term, as well
as how her Office would provide support to the special
procedures mandate holders in following the Code of
Conduct adopted at the intergovernmental level.
Concerning the second priority, he asked for further
elaboration on how she planned to combat religious
discrimination.
42. Mr. Mamdouhi (Iran, Islamic Republic of) said
that his delegation supported the High Commissioner’s
statement that there would be no tolerance for double
standards in United Nations mechanisms. He requested
elaboration on any initiatives to promote good
practices in technical cooperation to build capacity
among States in human rights protection.
43. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) emphasized the
importance of giving economic, social and cultural
rights, and in particular, the right to development, the
same importance as civil and political rights especially
in the context of the economic and financial crisis,
which was affecting developing countries most
seriously. Her delegation awaited with interest the
follow-up to the Durban Review Conference by the
Office of the High Commissioner. The issue of
geographic imbalance in the composition of the Office
of the High Commissioner should be addressed as
quickly as possible. The Universal Periodic Review
mechanism, based on cooperation, dialogue and mutual
respect, had been successful. It was important to avoid
politicizing the work of the special procedures mandate
holders and to respect the Code of Conduct. The Office
of the High Commissioner should receive the necessary
resources to allow all documents related to the
Universal Periodic Review to be prepared and
translated more promptly.
44. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) said that his delegation
supported the emphasis placed by the High
Commissioner on activities in the field. Communities
should take ownership of the work of human rights,
along with development. His delegation wished to
know how the High Commissioner intended to gain the
necessary popular backing in the field. As one of the
early supporters of General Assembly resolution
63/173 on the International Year of Human Rights
Learning, Benin wished to know what measures the
High Commissioner had taken and would take to
ensure follow-up, given that his delegation was
preparing a new draft resolution on the issue.
45. Ms. Horsington (Australia) welcomed the work
of experts from the Office of the High Commissioner
on indigenous justice systems. Her delegation strongly
supported the independence of the High Commissioner
and of the special procedures mandates and would like
to know how that independence would be maintained.
Australia wished to strengthen its cooperation with the
High Commissioner.
46. Mr. Elangovan (India) asked what progress had
been made in ensuring equitable geographical
representation in the Office of the High Commissioner.
He wondered whether it would be possible to provide
further information on the in-depth evaluation of
gender issues that the Office had conducted and
whether the results would be available before theA/C.3/64/SR.22
7 09-57032
beginning of the intergovernmental negotiations on
reforms of the United Nations gender architecture.
47. Ms. Pillay (High Commissioner for Human
Rights) thanked delegations for their comments and
suggestions, in particular those made by the
representatives of Colombia and Mexico on the value
of the country offices. The Human Rights Council was
an essential element of the overall reform of the United
Nations, and had distinguished itself in a relatively
short period of time from the Commission on Human
Rights, in particular, by holding special sessions and
by its Universal Periodic Review mechanism. She had
encouraged the Human Rights Council to address
chronic human rights situations and to conclude
sessions with declarations, rather than resolutions,
which could at times be contentious. States’ support for
the six priorities was welcomed, in particular
economic, social and cultural rights and the right to
development. The presence of the Office in 55 States
not only allowed theory to be put into practice but also
provided opportunities to gain new perspectives from
the people directly concerned. She was guided by the
mandate set out by the General Assembly; she stressed
that it was important for the Human Rights Council
and the Office of the High Commissioner to work
together and to cultivate transparency and openness in
all activities. In her view, dialogue would promote the
independence of the Office of the High Commissioner.
New York was encouraged to become actively involved
in the 2010 review of the Human Rights Council. It
was essential to achieve a consensus in both the
Council and the General Assembly.
48. Improving geographical diversity was important
for the credibility of the Office. She was doing her best
to diversify and incorporate representatives from
different legal systems, races, ethnicities and regions.
There had been a steady increase in the representation
of staff from underrepresented and non-represented
Member States, with significant increases in the
numbers of staff from Africa, Asia, Latin America and
the Caribbean and Eastern Europe. That progress had
been referred to in the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit (A/64/94). In response to the question posed by
Pakistan, she stated that the Office of the High
Commissioner had tried to expand the pool of qualified
candidates from the widest possible range of countries
and backgrounds, sending announcements to relevant
institutions around the world. Strategies were being
developed for closer cooperation on recruitment
activities with the United Nations country teams, the
field offices of the Office of the High Commissioner
and the permanent missions in Geneva. A human rights
national competitive examination had been organized
in 2008 for candidates from underrepresented
countries, and recruitment had begun. However, the
commitment of current staff was also valued, and
certain staff rules must be respected, such as the
15-day rule, whereby a qualified internal candidate
must receive priority over an outside candidate.
Perhaps some of those regulations should be reviewed.
49. Given the risk of special procedures exceeding
their mandate, the mandate holders and their
Coordination Committee, taking the Code of Conduct
very seriously, pursued constructive dialogue with
Member States and the Council and, had adopted an
internal advisory procedure in June 2008. The Office of
the High Commissioner had held three informational
meetings for new mandate holders and would take into
account the concerns of Member States.
50. She agreed that it was too early to assess the
universal periodic review, but did, however, stress that
the participation and recommendations of Member
States made it a useful tool and showed that the
international community attached great importance to
it. States were responsible for applying the resulting
recommendations and she had specifically requested
that they should receive the necessary technical
assistance. Country teams and United Nations agencies
had been made aware of the importance of those
recommendations. She valued the harmonization of the
recommendations of different bodies and would
appreciate greater participation by civil society. The
recommendations made in universal periodic reviews
took those of treaty bodies into account. The Council
and its bodies complemented each other, thus the
universal periodic review fostered the implementation
of international instruments. On behalf of treaty
bodies, she urged Member States to give them the
additional support they needed to complete their work
successfully.
51. Replying to the question of the representative of
Benin regarding application of General Assembly
resolution 62/171 on the International Year of Human
Rights Learning, she said that it came under the World
Programme for Human Rights Education. In that
regard, she mentioned the training resources available
on the website of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, to support national and local humanA/C.3/64/SR.22
09-57032 8
rights learning capacities under the Assisting
Communities Together Project, which gave financial
aid to local initiatives. Some 669 non-governmental
organizations in 79 countries had taken part in the
project thus far and the Office was preparing databases
on human rights education. She had recently signed an
agreement with the International Organization of la
Francophonie, and there would be training workshops
for field personnel.
52. Responding to questions from the representatives
of the Sudan, China, Egypt and Cuba regarding the
right to development, she said that the Office’s work in
that area concentrated on supporting the efforts of the
high-level task force to implement that right, in line
with the 2008-2010 workplan endorsed by the Human
Rights Council. She intended to collaborate with the
bodies responsible for implementing the global
partnership to mainstream the right to development in
their policies and programmes. The Office would strive
to raise public awareness of issues related to the right
to development and to the global problems that
affected it, such as the financial and economic crises,
climate change, trade, investment and financing for
development.
53. In response to the question by the representative
of China, she said that human rights principles
underpinned the eight Millennium Development Goals
and that an approach based on human rights helped to
increase the degree of accountability. That approach,
and the principles of participation, non-discrimination
and equality, empowered the most vulnerable where
their rights were concerned. The main difficulty
involved mustering the political will and the necessary
resources effectively to realize human rights and the
Millennium Development Goals in a coordinated
fashion. She was in contact with the heads of several
bodies because she believed that the goals were not
explicit enough when it came to the protection of
human rights and sought to correct that in theory and in
practice.
54. With regard to migration, a priority area, she
believed that it was too early to describe, as the
representative of Mexico had requested, the results of
the migrant protection plan, but the Office intended to
link human rights and the empowerment of migrants to
achieve development in the run-up to the Global Forum
on Migration and Development. She mentioned the
convening of a thematic discussion by the Human
Rights Council in September 2009 on the detention of
migrants, which she had attended, and continued to ask
Member States to ratify the International Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families which, she believed,
would provide the basis for the programme of action.
She was also a member of the Global Migration Group,
which recommended a human rights-based approach to
migration.
55. Turning to the rights of women, in response to the
questions of the representatives of Chile and Colombia,
she referred to General Assembly resolution 63/311,
which supported the establishment of a new entity for
gender equality and which she strongly supported.
Recalling that the Human Rights Council had asked her
to organize a thematic study of the equality of women
before the law and to examine the effects of
discriminatory legislation on women, she welcomed
the fact that the matter was on the Council’s agenda.
56. Regarding the composite entity responsible for
questions related to gender equality, there would be a
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for sexual violence against women in times of armed
conflict. She hoped that all stakeholders would ensure
that that new entity would be well-positioned to
provide overall direction in the area of gender equality.
She guaranteed that the Office of the High
Commissioner would work closely with the entity so
that women and girls around the world were protected
against rights violations. She would appreciate having
input on the nomination of candidates for the post.
57. In reply to the question of the representative of
Sweden on human rights mainstreaming, she said that
the Office of the High Commissioner had played a
major part in building stronger partnerships with
United Nations bodies aimed at human rights capacity-
building, and that had enabled support for about 60
country teams, the deployment of 10 human rights
advisers and the dissemination of learning modules to
all United Nations country teams to prepare a common
course structure. The Office was in close contact with
other United Nations bodies to agree on a coordination
mechanism to follow up Decision 2.
58. Replying to the question of the representative of
Malaysia on the follow-up to the expert seminar on
freedom of expression and advocacy of religious
hatred, she said that freedom of expression, which was
extremely important, had its limitations in international
humanitarian law, hence the need for clarity inA/C.3/64/SR.22
9 09-57032
definitions and practical application. To follow up the
expert seminar, the High Commissioner had suggested
that a number of expert workshops should be held on
advocacy of hatred to understand better legislative
models, legal practices and domestic policies in
different parts of the world, as mentioned in the
outcome document of the Durban Review Conference.
She drew attention to the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council on the freedom of expression
(A/HRC/12/L.14/Rev.1) and said that she would
continue to encourage dialogue among religions.
59. Regarding the impact of climate change
amounting to human rights violations, raised by the
representative of the Maldives, and the assistance the
Office of the High Commissioner could give in that
regard, proposed by the representative of New Zealand,
she said that climate change, as acknowledged by the
Human Rights Council and various human rights
mechanisms, hindered the effective realization of
human rights and that its negative effects were felt by
States, economies and, above all, peoples. She urged
States to foresee the effects of climate change on
human rights and recalled that they were bound by
their obligations in all areas, including the
implementation of mitigation and adaptation projects.
Action was driven by the human dimension of climate
change, with its effects on people, especially the most
vulnerable. She participated in combating climate
change with human rights bodies and expected positive
developments after the United Nations Climate Change
Conference, to be held in Copenhagen.
60. Concerning the question posed by Sweden on
behalf of the European Union regarding the death
penalty, she said that the Office of the High
Commissioner had prepared a report of the Secretary-
General (A/63/293) that contained relevant developments
as at 1 July 2008. It also prepared the annual reports of
the Secretary-General on the same subject for the
Human Rights Council. The twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty, would be
observed on 15 December 2009. She asked Member
States that still applied the death penalty to establish a
moratorium and to consider abolition and ratification
of the Second Optional Protocol.
61. She agreed with the representatives of China,
Egypt and Cuba that economic, social and cultural
rights were a priority. In her view, the promotion and
protection of those rights were tied to other
fundamental issues, such as non-discrimination, armed
conflict, violence, insecurity and impunity. The Office
of the High Commissioner had published reports and
manuals to strengthen the application of those rights, in
addition to two fact sheets on the right to housing and
the right to food. Through field offices, it had
considerably strengthened the capacities of national
partners to monitor violations of economic, social and
cultural rights. The adoption of the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the Universal Periodic Review
were two tools that enabled the Office of the High
Commissioner and Governments to give greater
consideration to the matter and to fulfil their
obligations in that regard.
62. The representative of the Sudan had referred to
the justiciability of economic, social and cultural
rights, a matter of particular interest to her as a former
judge, and she recalled that South Africa’s
Constitutional Court had ruled the matter justiciable.
The Office of the High Commissioner had strengthened
the legal protection of economic, social and cultural
rights and was working to promote the domestic
justiciability of those rights, along with the adoption
and ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights. The Office of the High Commissioner
was planning to hold training and seminars with
judges, representatives of civil society organizations
and other stakeholders, along with activities to raise
awareness of the importance of ratification of the
Optional Protocol and the inclusion of remedies.
63. Turning to the question of the representative of
Egypt on trafficking in persons, she said that the Office
had taken a human rights approach, centred on victims,
that examined the violations of their rights first of all,
as well as the factors that made persons more
vulnerable to trafficking. Early in 2010 it would
publish a commentary on the principles on human
rights and human trafficking that would include an
overall legal and political analysis of the principles and
guidelines, and it would continue to strengthen
partnerships with other United Nations bodies and
intergovernmental organizations, within the framework
of the United Nations Global Initiative to Fight Human
Trafficking.
64. Concerning the Office of the High
Commissioner’s work in the field, she said thatA/C.3/64/SR.22
09-57032 10
international human rights standards and principles
were the main foundation and tool for its efforts. The
Office had taken part in national and regional activities
and was working to better communicate knowledge
and understanding of the obligations binding on parties
to treaties and the need for follow-up to
recommendations, while making treaty bodies, the
universal periodic review and thematic mechanisms the
foundations of efforts by States, the United Nations
and other partnerships. With the cooperation of United
Nations country teams and of the main national
partners, such as human rights institutes, the Office of
the High Commissioner must maintain a presence in
the field to enable countries to follow up the
recommendations made by human rights mechanisms.
The fact that representatives in the field directly
monitored human rights and remained in constant
contact with their counterparts in the countries
enriched knowledge, gave a better understanding of
human rights issues, ensured that emerging problems
were noted and anticipated and supported the
preparation, in consultation and partnership with
national stakeholders, of more suitable and sustainable
technical cooperation programmes.
65. In response to the question asked by the
representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland regarding the work of the Office
of the High Commissioner in Nepal, she said that she
was proud of its activities and that it would take a long
time to list them all. For example, as a result of
investigations and awareness-raising by her Office, the
Government of Nepal had established a special legal
commission to investigate serious incidents and
intended to create a commission to deal with forced
disappearance, which would result in criminal
penalties. The efforts of the Office of the High
Commissioner had prevented the passage of a poorly
drafted bill concerning the creation of a truth and
reconciliation commission, led to capacity-building
among human rights bodies and civil society
organizations and encouraged the holding of training
workshops for the media and security forces. Its
monitoring of demonstrations had led to a reduction in
the use of violence. Finally, it had played an important
role within the protection cluster by applying a human
rights approach in emergency situations.
66. In response to the question of Sweden on behalf
of the European Union regarding credible
investigations of alleged human rights violations, she
said that in her view an independent expert mechanism
was necessary to carry out investigations freely and
without interference. Any independent mechanism
investigating alleged human rights violations must be
able to monitor and assess compliance with the
Government’s obligations vis-à-vis accountability, to
document the available information on violations and
to formulate recommendations to convert those
violations while respecting international rules. Lastly,
victims would be able to report their concerns more
easily if the investigating mechanism was not affiliated
either with the Government or the parties to the
conflict. Responding to the question of the
representative of Liechtenstein, she said that domestic
investigations and prosecutions must be facilitated on
the basis of the principle of complementarity contained
in the Rome Statute by reinforcing, inter alia, domestic
mechanisms and national legal capacities. The rapid
response unit had responded immediately in many
crisis situations and had allowed for the emergency
application of various Human Rights Council
resolutions and decisions, at the request of countries
and peacekeeping missions with which cooperation had
been strengthened.
67. In response to the representatives of Palestine,
Egypt, the Syrian Arab Republic and Sweden regarding
the lack of references in her report to the Goldstone
report, she said that the Human Rights Council had
adopted resolution A/HRC/RES/S-12/1 on the matter,
which would be examined by the General Assembly,
and that she had not wanted to encroach on its
mandate. The report of the fact-finding mission had
made important recommendations aimed at ending the
impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of human rights
violations committed by all parties to the conflict and
proposed reparations for the victims, as well as
provisions to prevent new violations. On many
occasions she had said that she hoped that the
perpetrators would be held responsible for their actions
and that she supported the recommendations of the
fact-finding mission, while stating that accountability
must not be overshadowed in the name of the peace
process and that the two could not be disassociated.
She welcomed the fact that the Human Rights Council
had adopted the report’s recommendations and waited
with interest for the parties concerned and the
competent United Nations bodies to follow it up. All
other parties must carry out, without delay, credible,
independent and transparent investigations into alleged
violations of human rights and humanitarianA/C.3/64/SR.22
11 09-57032
international law, in accordance with international
rules. For the sake of impartiality, she would like to see
questions of accountability addressed in all situations
where serious conflicts were ongoing and civilians
were in danger.
68. In response to the question by the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic concerning how her Office
could protect human rights in territories under foreign
occupation, she said that she was fully aware of the
special vulnerability of peoples living under
occupation. She stressed the comprehensive application
of international humanitarian law, international human
rights law, refugee law and international criminal law.
The Office of the High Commissioner maintained a
presence in those territories, where it offered
assistance, notably in the occupied Palestinian territory,
and it would continue to work to protect vulnerable
persons.
69. Regarding what countries could do to help the
Office of the High Commissioner to achieve its goals,
she said that she constantly requested the assistance of
States and actively supported domestic and
international justice and accountability. She invited
countries to take advantage of training programmes
aimed at strengthening legal systems. The support of
States was essential if the Office of the High
Commissioner was to be more effective. It counted on
Member States not to hamper accountability by raising
issues of a political nature. Impartiality was required
every time that matters of human rights violations were
addressed, since no country was immune from such
violations.
70. Mr. Gambari (Special Adviser on Myanmar),
introducing the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar (A/64/334), said
that during his visit in July 2009, the Secretary-General
had made specific proposals to the senior leadership of
Myanmar, based on his five-point agenda. On that
occasion, the Secretary-General had stressed that it was
up to the Government to take the necessary measures
to hold free and fair elections and to encourage
development, but he had also invited political parties
and ethnic groups to participate constructively in the
political process. After the visit, at its second high-
level meeting, the Group of Friends of the Secretary-
General on Myanmar demonstrated the need for
stronger agreement and unity of action in three aspects:
to urge Myanmar to work with the United Nations to
create the necessary conditions for the holding of
credible elections; to convince Myanmar to take
advantage of the experience acquired by the United
Nations in the field of national reconciliation, the
respect for human rights, sustainable development and
democratic transition; to signal the international
community’s willingness to help the people of
Myanmar to address the challenges they faced. The
Prime Minister of Myanmar had confirmed to the
Secretary-General that his country was committed to
the holding of free and fair elections in 2010.
71. Concerning the events that had taken place since
July, he said that the Secretary-General’s view was that
by sentencing Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, Myanmar had
missed the opportunity to commit to an era of political
openness, but that Government efforts to avert tension
with armed ethnic groups were of great interest.
Although Myanmar had recently taken encouraging
steps, including the release of over 130 political
prisoners, the resumption of talks between Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi and the Government, and her meeting
with foreign diplomats to discuss sanctions, those steps
remained an incomplete response to the specific
proposals made by the Secretary-General.
72. An important juncture in the political transition
would take place in 2010, when Myanmar would prepare
to hold its first elections for almost 20 years. It was an
opportunity to promote change to create a peaceful,
democratic, prosperous and united country. The
credibility of the political process would remain in doubt
unless Myanmar took measures to release all political
prisoners, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, and to allow
them to participate freely in the political life of their
country; to engage in dialogue with the opposition and
ethnic groups; and to create conditions conducive to
inclusive and credible elections. The need to address the
pressing humanitarian and socio-economic challenges
facing the people of Myanmar was equally important. The
Government could do more, with the support of the
international community, to address humanitarian needs,
meet the Millennium Development Goals and exploit its
economic potential.
73. Myanmar must undertake a process of national
reconciliation and democratic transition based on the
respect for human rights, dialogue and mutual
understanding. By collaborating constructively with
the Secretary-General within the framework of the
good offices mandate, it would affirm its sovereignty
and its willingness to make cooperation with the
United Nations a cornerstone of its foreign policy. ItA/C.3/64/SR.22
09-57032 12
was up to Myanmar to profit from the political
transition to deliver on its people’s aspirations, and to
respond to the expectations and encouragements of the
international community.
74. Mr. Thaung Tun (Myanmar) said that the
Secretary-General had indeed stated in his report that
Myanmar intended to hold free and fair elections in
2010 and to hand over power to the Government that
would be formed in accordance with the Constitution.
The Secretary-General had also been informed of the
efforts made to engage Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and of
the fact that the absence of progress had not been due
to the lack of willingness on the part of the
Government. He regretted, however, that the other
issues in the report had not been clearly explained.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi had met the Minister of
Employment and the representatives of Australia, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America. Furthermore, 7,114
prisoners had been released the previous month. The
intervention of the Secretary-General in the trial of a
Myanmar citizen under Myanmar laws could be
regarded as exceeding the bounds of his good offices
mission. There were no prisoners of conscience in
Myanmar.
75. The Government was taking the necessary steps
to hold free and fair elections. Electoral laws would be
promulgated and an electoral commission would be
formed soon. The holding of multiparty elections was
an important step in a transition to a peaceful, modern
and democratic State. With regard to socio-economic
conditions, progress had been palpable since peace had
again prevailed in the country. Myanmar was striving
to create the environment of peace and stability
necessary for democracy. The Government and people
of Myanmar must fashion their own destiny. Myanmar
was confident that the Secretary-General would use his
good offices mission to assist it to achieve its goal.
76. Mr. Ashiki (Japan) welcomed the decision by
Myanmar to release political prisoners but was
concerned by the sentencing of Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi. Japan called for the release of all political
prisoners before the 2010 elections and for the
strengthening of democracy with the participation of
all the parties concerned. Although the mediation
activities and efforts of the United Nations could not be
underestimated, Myanmar’s neighbours had an
important role to play. He asked how the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General saw collaboration
with Asian countries in support of the work in
Myanmar.
77. Ms. Taylor (New Zealand) asked about the next
steps in the Secretary-General’s good offices mission,
including the follow-up to the high-level meeting of
the Group of Friends on Myanmar, and whether the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General would soon
return to the country. She also asked what the
international community could do to help to ease
tension between the Government and armed rebel
groups.
78. Ms. Mårtensson (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the European Union had
expressed its concerns regarding Myanmar in the draft
resolutions submitted to the General Assembly year
after year. The upcoming draft resolution would refer
to the human rights situation in relation to the 2010
elections. Based on the information contained in the
report of the Secretary-General, she asked what would
be the impact on the elections if no electoral law was
passed and what the provisions of such a law should
be. Because the drafting and adoption of the
Constitution of Myanmar had not enjoyed the
participation of all the concerned parties, she would
also like to know what the Government could do to
amend the Constitution to bring it in line with
international human rights standards. She also asked
what steps the Special Adviser had taken to coordinate
with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Myanmar.
79. Mr. Tagle (Chile), echoing the representative of
Myanmar, said that only the people of Myanmar could
decide their own future, but they must do so through
free and truly democratic elections. He condemned the
sentencing of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, which could not
help to create the right conditions for free and fair
elections, and expressed the hope that the situation
would change. He asked what kind of regional
collaboration existed. From its own experience, Chile
believed that regional organizations had a fundamental
role to play in successful elections.
80. Ms. Sicade (United States of America) said that
the release of political prisoners was a prerequisite for
progress in national reconciliation and the transition
towards democracy. She asked whether Myanmar
intended to release other political prisoners soon.A/C.3/64/SR.22
13 09-57032
81. Ms. Horsington (Australia) asked what the
international community should do to engage Myanmar
constructively.
82. Mr. Gambari, in response to the comments by
the representative of Myanmar, said that one of the
aims of his remarks had been to update the information
contained in the report, which had been produced
several months earlier. The Secretary-General was
encouraged by the steps taken by the Government of
Myanmar after his last visit, but he was awaiting
responses to the concrete proposals made, including
elections set for 2010 as the fifth stage in the seven-
point road map. The recommendations of the
Secretary-General would make the process more
credible and the results more acceptable.
83. In response to the representative of Japan
regarding coordination between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
he said that the Secretary-General’s good offices
mission allowed for close coordination with the
countries of ASEAN, as a result of the summit
meetings between the United Nations and ASEAN
leaders, bilateral consultations and the meetings of
working groups in New York, spearheaded by
Indonesia. The Group of Friends of the Secretary-
General on Myanmar had held nine meetings, including
two at the ministerial level, with the active
participation of several ASEAN members.
84. In response to the representative of New Zealand,
he said that he was prepared to return to Myanmar to
hold productive talks and welcomed the determination
of the principal States concerned to encourage
Myanmar to follow up the concrete proposals made by
the Secretary-General to achieve the common goals of
all: a united, peaceful and prosperous Myanmar in a
transition to democracy, fully respecting the human
rights of its people. As for how the Secretary-General’s
good offices mission and the international community
could lessen tension between the Government and
armed ethnic groups, the only possibility lay in
dialogue between the Government and the other
stakeholders.
85. In response to the question of the representative
of Sweden, he pointed out that the Secretary-General
had clearly told the senior leadership of Myanmar that
the sooner the electoral laws were passed, the sooner
confidence would be established and participation
would be encouraged. He had met to discuss that
agenda with the representatives of the 10 political
parties registered in Myanmar and had asked them to
play an active role in the political process. It would be
beneficial for the Government, the opposition groups
and all stakeholders to engage in dialogue to establish
conditions conducive to free and fair elections and to
discuss the Constitution and its future amendments and
all political issues in general.
86. Concerning coordination with the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar, he said that pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 63/245, which authorized the Secretary-
General to provide his good offices, he and the Special
Rapporteur maintained close contact and exchanged
views before, during and after each visit to Myanmar.
87. In reply to the representative of the United States
on the prospects for another release of political
prisoners, he said that the question must be put to the
representative of Myanmar and that he had no
information on the matter other than the periodic
amnesties granted to political prisoners by Myanmar.
88. Finally, in response to the question of the
representative of Australia, he said that he had always
recommended cooperation between the international
community and the Government of Myanmar to
promote common goals.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.