United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.44
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
15 February 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-59348 (E)
*1159348*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 44th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 15 November 2011, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly
on Ageing (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/66/SR.44
11-59348 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older
Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing
(continued) (A/C.3/66/L.13/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.13/Rev.1: Follow-up to the
Second World Assembly on Ageing
1. The Chair invited the Committee to take action on
draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.13/Add.1. The draft
resolution contained no programme-budget implications.
2. Mr. Cesa (Argentina), speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, said that since the introduction
of the draft resolution, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Greece, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Ukraine and the
United States of America had joined the sponsors.
3. The open-ended working group on ageing
established under General Assembly resolution 65/182
was not a permanent forum on the issue but would
continue to function within its current mandate and
existing resources until the end of that mandate, unless an
explicit agreement was reached at a later stage by
consensus. Its meetings would be held at times that would
not conflict with those of other major meetings and only
on the basis of available resources. Interpretation would
be provided on an as available basis.
4. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Andorra, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Iceland,
Monaco, Montenegro, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and
Uzbekistan had become sponsors.
5. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.13/Rev.1 was adopted.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.19/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.19/Rev.1: Improvement of
the situation of women in rural areas
6. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
7. Ms. Ochir (Mongolia), after briefly explaining
the major revisions made to the draft resolution in
informal consultations, said that since the introduction
of the draft resolution, Argentina, Belize, Chile, China,
Costa Rica, Greece, India, Israel, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey
and the United States of America had joined the
sponsors.
8. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Ecuador,
Egypt, Finland, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Malaysia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay,
the Philippines, Portugal, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Zambia and Zimbabwe had become sponsors.
9. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.19/Rev.1 was adopted.
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council
(continued) (A/C.3/66/L.64/Rev.1, L.65 and L.66)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.65: United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training
10. Mr. El Mkhantar (Morocco), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.65 on behalf of the sponsors,
said that the draft resolution, purely procedural in
nature, marked the adoption by the Human Rights
Council of resolution 16/1 on the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training.
Announcing that Japan, Jordan, Monaco, Paraguay, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Spain and Uruguay had
joined the sponsors, he thanked all countries who had
sponsored the draft resolution for their support and
invited those that had not yet done so to become
sponsors. Since its 2007 launch, the initiative had
received great support from Member States,
non-governmental organizations and experts who had
helped draft the declaration, which was now considered
a key reference document.A/C.3/66/SR.44
3 11-59348
11. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Malaysia, the
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Moldova had
become sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.64/Rev.1: Report of the
Human Rights Council
12. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme-budget implications.
13. Ms. Maduhu (United Republic of Tanzania),
speaking on behalf of the Group of African States, said
that the Human Rights Council’s constructive,
cooperative approach, its avoidance of selectivity and
double standards, and its provision of advice and
support to Governments were making it possible to
progressively overcome obstacles to consolidating
universal respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. The report of the Human Rights Council
contained recommendations that were of the utmost
importance to the Group, regarding, inter alia,
trafficking in persons, combating contemporary forms
of slavery and the right to development. In view of the
fact that that some recommendations continued to be
submitted to a vote despite their significance, and that
others — of great significance to the Group and to
developing countries — continued to be undermined,
the draft resolution had been revised in a spirit of
constructive engagement. Accordingly, the words
“some of” in paragraph 1 had been deleted.
14. Ms. Kolontai (Belarus) said that her delegation
could not accept politicized resolutions that resulted
from the Human Rights Council’s lack of objectivity in
assessing human rights situations. It was unfortunate
that the Council was making the same mistakes that
had led to the demise of the discredited Commission on
Human Rights. She decisively condemned the
Council’s politicized resolution on her country and
pointed out that the lack of consensus among the
members of the Council regarding the resolution
showed that it did not reflect the opinion of the
international community. Such politicization on the
part of certain States devalued the role and function of
the universal periodic review mechanism.
15. Moreover, the adoption of the resolution on
Belarus undermined the institution-building package
that the Council had established and that provided for
the removal of the so-called Belarus question from the
Council’s agenda. In that connection, and taking into
account the fact that the report of the Human Rights
Council contained decisions that went against the bases
of international cooperation and friendly relations
among States enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, her delegation was forced to request that a
recorded vote be taken on the draft resolution, which it
would vote against.
16. Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that it was
unfortunate that the report of the Human Rights
Council (A/66/53) contained resolutions S-16/1 and
S-17/1 on the situation of human rights in the Syrian
Arab Republic, as they were based on misleading
media information and used language that was
unprecedented in its hostility, sending a strong message
of support for acts of terrorism and violence committed
by armed terrorist groups.
17. Given the violations of human rights that such
acts constituted, the Council’s non-objective stance
was mystifying. Interference in his country’s internal
affairs aimed at carrying out the political and military
schemes of Western countries that were its enemies.
Billions of dollars had been smuggled into the Syrian
Arab Republic in recent months and distributed among
extremists, arms smugglers and traders and armed
terrorist groups supported by the United States of
America and other countries, which his delegation
would identify in due course in the context of their
financing of terrorist activities.
18. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking on a point of order, said that he wished to
remind the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic to
act in accordance with the appropriate Committee
decorum. His delegation strongly objected to the
reference made to his country by the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
19. Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that many
criminals had confessed to killing demonstrators,
planting explosives in crowded public places, burning
and destroying public and private establishments, in
addition to harassing citizens unwilling to partake of
their crimes. Meanwhile, television stations in the
employ of foreign powers continued to fabricate
information and incite people without interruption. The
High Commissioner for Human Rights had refused to
mention those realities in her report, despite the fact
that his country had provided information on the events
and on measures that it was taking to address them. ForA/C.3/66/SR.44
11-59348 4
those reasons, his delegation would vote against the
resolution.
20. That decision, however, did not change his
country’s firm, principled position on the
recommendations contained in the Council’s report on
human rights violations committed by Israel in the
occupied Syrian Golan and Palestine, an issue that
merited the support of all Member States. His
delegation also reiterated its principled position against
interference by any country in the internal affairs of
any other, using the defence of human rights as a
pretext, and categorically rejected the Council’s
country-specific resolutions on the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Belarus, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and Myanmar.
21. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that,
while his delegation supported the draft resolution, it
was concerned about a number of decisions adopted by
the Human Rights Council, a body initially established
to pursue constructive dialogue and cooperation on
human rights issues. Noting the disturbing trend
towards divisiveness in its work in recent years, he
pointed out that his delegation did not support the
Human Rights Council’s resolutions on human rights
situations in Belarus, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the Syrian Arab Republic or on so-called sexual-
orientation issues.
22. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking in
explanation of vote before voting on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
Iceland, Montenegro, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey; the stabilization and
association process countries Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; and, in addition, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Liechtenstein, Norway, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said that the
European Union’s concerns were largely procedural.
Since countries could follow up on recommendations
made by the Human Rights Council individually, it was
not necessary to note Council resolutions in a generic
manner.
23. By asking the Committee to take note of the
Council’s report in its entirety, the draft resolution
ignored the existing arrangement agreed to, whereby
the Committee would only consider and, when
necessary, take action on individual recommendations.
Expressing disappointment that the draft resolution
continued to disregard that understanding and noting
the questions that many Member States still had about
the initiative taken by the Group of African States, he
regretted that it had not been possible to discuss
procedural and other aspects of the text in an open
meeting. For that reason, the member States of the
European Union would abstain from voting on the draft
resolution as orally revised.
24. At the request of the representative of Belarus, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/66/L.64/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen.
Against:
Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Syrian Arab
Republic.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,A/C.3/66/SR.44
5 11-59348
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
25. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.64/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted by 95 votes to 4, with 60
abstentions.*
26. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his delegation had abstained in the vote as it did not
see the benefit of the draft resolution. While the United
States remained concerned about the Council’s
disproportionate focus on Israel, the Council’s ability
to serve as a multilateral forum for promoting and
protecting human rights had notably improved in the
past year, as evident, inter alia, through its historic
resolution 17/19 on human rights, sexual orientation
and gender identity, resolution 16/18 promoting
religious tolerance, and the establishment of
commissions of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
27. Mr. Mohammad Pour Ferami (Islamic Republic
of Iran) said that his delegation had abstained in the
vote because the report of the Human Rights Council
included resolutions and recommendations that were of
grave concern and mainly pursued politicized
objectives extending well beyond human rights causes.
The adoption of country-specific resolutions, including
the one on his country, was futile and reflected the
same double standards that had led to the demise of the
Commission on Human Rights.
28. Ms. Burgess (Canada) said that her delegation
had abstained in the vote because follow-up on the
Council’s report should take place in a plenary meeting
of the General Assembly, not in the Third Committee.
The latter approach gave the false impression that the
Council was subordinate to the Committee. In addition,
Canada was concerned about the recommendations
regarding the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict, which unfairly singled out one
party, underscoring the Council’s disproportionate
focus on Israel.
29. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her country had voted
in favour of the draft resolution in the light of the
importance that it attached to most of the topics
contained in the report. Nevertheless, it did not support
the Council’s resolutions which entailed selective
initiatives against developing countries, especially
those clearly based on political motivations, such as
the resolutions on Belarus, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and the Syrian Arab Republic. Her country supported
the impartial, objective and constructive work of the
Council, but would oppose any attempt to adopt such
selective, country-specific resolutions, since that
approach had led to the failure of the Commission on
Human Rights.
30. Mr. Tagle (Chile) said that his delegation had
voted in favour of the draft resolution, as his
Government supported the actions and decisions of the
Council, which had always abided by the principle of
non-selectivity, and appreciated the independence of
the human rights mechanisms and special procedures.
Nevertheless, it had doubts regarding procedure, since
the Council’s report should have been voted on in the
plenary of the General Assembly. It was hoped that the
following year’s draft resolution on the report would
be open to consultations involving the entire
membership.
31. Ms. Furman (Israel) said that the Council’s
report provided a comprehensive picture of its work,
and Israel welcomed some of the Council’s actions, in
particular resolution 17/19 on human rights, sexual
orientation and gender identity, its special sessions on
the human rights situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
and the appointment of a special rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran under resolution 16/9. Nevertheless, the report and
the resolutions that it contained against Israel reflected
the Council’s continued bias against it. Agenda item 7
of the Human Rights Council and the resolutions
adopted under it undermined the Council’s integrity
and credibility, and it was regrettable that the Council’s
recent review had not corrected that fundamental flaw.
That systematic institutional discrimination tainted the
Council’s ability to promote and protect human rights
in the world. Her country had thus abstained in the
vote. * The delegations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Iraq subsequently informed the Committee that they
had intended to abstain.A/C.3/66/SR.44
11-59348 6
32. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that his country had
voted in favour of the draft resolution, despite
disagreement on some issues, in the light of the
Council’s efforts to reach an understanding on various
issues of mutual interest and the consensus reached on
controversial issues, including on combating
intolerance based on religion or belief. Nevertheless, it
was a matter of concern that some Council resolutions,
such as that on sexual orientation and gender identity,
were not in line with human rights standards or laws.
Also of concern was the adoption of selective and
politicized country-specific resolutions. Pakistan
looked forward to strengthening the work of the
Council in addressing the human rights of all persons
in all countries in a non-selective and impartial manner
in the future.
33. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that her
country had voted in favour of the draft resolution, as
in previous years. Nevertheless, Cuba was concerned
about the negative trend of political manipulation and
double standards in the consideration of human rights
issues in the Committee and the Council, especially the
latter’s selective and discriminatory criticism of
developing countries while overlooking the situations
in developed countries, an approach which was
reminiscent of that of the Commission on Human
Rights.
34. Ms. Medal (Nicaragua) said that her country had
voted in favour of the draft resolution, recognizing the
Council as a legitimate body for the equitable
consideration of human rights issues and the universal
periodic review as an effective tool for assessing
human rights situations in different countries.
Nevertheless, Nicaragua rejected the adoption of
country-specific resolutions, which led to
politicization, selectivity and double standards.
35. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) said that her delegation
had voted in favour of the draft resolution because it
fully supported the Council’s work that was conducted
in a mutually respectful and equitable manner.
Nevertheless, it was against country-specific human
rights resolutions or the pressuring or singling out of
countries in the name of human rights.
36. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland), speaking also on behalf
of Norway, said that, while both countries strongly
supported the Council’s work, they had abstained in the
vote for procedural reasons, as the consideration of the
Council’s report fell under the purview of the General
Assembly, not the Committee.
37. Ms. Murillo (Costa Rica) said that her country
fully supported the work of the Council and its
resolutions and recommendations and had in the past
supported texts similar to the draft resolutions in the
report. Nevertheless, Costa Rica was concerned about
the motives for which the recorded vote had been
requested. It welcomed the oral revision made by the
African Group, but had abstained in the vote because
the Council was the highest authority for addressing
human rights and its report should be submitted for
consideration by the plenary General Assembly, not the
Committee.
38. Mr. Frick (Liechtenstein) said that his country
was an active and strong supporter of the work of the
Human Rights Council and welcomed the
recommendations that the Council had transmitted to
the General Assembly for further action, particularly
on the third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Declaration on Human
Rights Education and Training. As agreed during the
review of the Council, there was no need for the
Committee to note the Council’s recommendations.
Should the Committee decide not to follow a
recommendation, it could do so by not acting on it.
Also, it was regrettable that the draft resolution
disregarded the understanding that had been reached on
the division of work between the Committee and the
plenary General Assembly in dealing with the
Council’s report. It was for the General Assembly, not
the Committee, to take action on the report.
39. Mr. Jang Il Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that his country had voted against the
draft resolution, not because it took issue with the
Council’s report as a whole, but because the country-
specific draft resolutions that it contained, including
the one on his country, ran counter to the principles of
objectivity and non-selectivity that should govern the
consideration of human rights issues and the universal
periodic review. His Government would continue to
oppose all such resolutions because they reflected
politicization, selectivity and double standards.
40. Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) said that, although his
delegation strongly supported the Council’s work, like
others, it was concerned about the procedural issue of
the Council’s report being submitted for consideration
by the Committee. It had thus abstained in the vote.A/C.3/66/SR.44
7 11-59348
41. Ms. Alp (Turkey) said that her country had voted
in favour of the draft resolution in the belief that the
recommendations of the Council must be noted in a
non-selective manner. Follow-up to the report of the
independent international fact-finding mission on the
incident of the humanitarian flotilla under resolutions
16/20 and 17/10 must be diligently pursued.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.66: Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a
communications procedure
42. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) read
out a statement, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, on the
programme budget implications of paragraphs 1 and 2
of the draft resolution. It was anticipated that, based on
the assumption that the Optional Protocol would enter
into force in late 2013 or early 2014, no programme
budget implications would arise for the biennium
2012-2013. It was also estimated that the additional
requirements of $2.190 million, including $1.582
million, under section 2, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council affairs and conference
management; $580,100 under section 24, Human
Rights; and $28,000 under section 29 E, Administration,
Geneva, would arise for the biennium 2014-2015 and
would be taken into consideration in the context of
preparation of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015.
43. Should the General Assembly adopt the draft
resolution, it was anticipated that no additional
resources would be required either under the
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 or
under the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2012-2013. He recalled that, during the
introduction of the draft resolution, the main sponsor
had orally revised the wording of the preambular
paragraph. Lastly, he said that Bangladesh, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Mali, Morocco, Poland, Turkey and the United States
of America had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
44. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.66, as orally revised,
was adopted.
45. Mr. Faizal (Maldives), speaking also on behalf of
Austria, Chile, Germany, Slovakia, Slovenia, Thailand
and Uruguay, said that, while those main sponsors
would have preferred maintaining the wording of the
draft resolution as recommended by the Human Rights
Council, they welcomed the spirit of compromise that
had prevailed during negotiations and its adoption by
consensus. He encouraged all States to consider
signing and ratifying the Optional Protocol as soon as
possible once it would be open for signature in 2012.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(A/C.3/66/L.29/Rev.1 and L.58)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.33, L.36, L.40,
L.41, L.46, L.47/Rev.1, L.48/Rev.1, L.52/Rev.1
and L.53/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.29/Rev.1: Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional
Protocol thereto
46. The Chair drew the Committee’s attention to the
statement of the programme budget implications of the
draft resolution in document A/C.3/66/L.58.
47. Mr. Gomez (Sweden), speaking also on behalf of
Mexico and New Zealand, introduced draft resolution
A/C.3/66/L.29/Rev.1. Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
the Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, the Federated
States of Micronesia, France, Germany, Greece,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Lithuania, Malta,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Papua New Guinea, the
Philippines, Poland, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Samoa, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, the Sudan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and Vanuatu had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution. Lastly, he underscored the rapid rate
of ratification of the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, a trend which would likely
continue, and hoped that States would be committed to
its implementation.
48. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belize, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, the Dominican Republic, Ethiopia,
Guinea-Bissau, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Malaysia, Mali, Myanmar, Namibia, Niger,
Panama, Paraguay, the Republic of Moldova, theA/C.3/66/SR.44
11-59348 8
Russian Federation, San Marino, South Africa,
Suriname, Swaziland, Tunisia, Turkey, the United
States of America and Uruguay had also joined the
sponsors of the draft resolution.
49. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.29/Rev.1 was adopted.
50. Mr. Kimura (Japan) said that his country had
joined the consensus to adopt the draft resolution in the
light of the urgent need to tackle the backlog faced by
the Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the need to take into consideration the
issue of reasonable accommodation. It must
nevertheless be borne in mind that the programme
budget implications of the decision to extend the
Committee’s working schedule would be absorbed by
the regular budget of the United Nations, which was
not unlimited, especially in the context of the difficult
economic times. That Committee must continue to
enhance its working methods and effectiveness.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.33: Promotion of equitable
geographical distribution in the membership of the
human rights treaty bodies
51. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
52. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, said that China had
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
53. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking in
explanation of vote before voting on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
Iceland, Montenegro, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey; the stabilization and
association process countries Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; and, in addition, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Liechtenstein, Norway, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said that while the
European Union fully recognized the importance of the
principle of equitable geographical distribution in the
composition of human rights treaty bodies, it opposed
the draft resolution on several grounds. Human rights
treaties already contained provisions that prescribed
the composition of treaty bodies through elections of
State party nationals. Though some treaties did
explicitly state that consideration would be given to
geographical distribution and the representation of
different legal systems, it was not up to the General
Assembly to modify the provisions on the composition
of treaty bodies, nor should it seek to induce States
parties to do so.
54. The draft resolution was particularly prescriptive
in its proposal of a quota system and its inappropriate
request for chairs of treaty bodies to make
recommendations on equitable geographic distribution,
both of which the European Union strongly objected
to. Such matters, if considered at all, should be
discussed by the States parties concerned. It was
regrettable that the delegation of Cuba had not
incorporated more constructive suggestions on how to
achieve a better balance in treaty bodies without
resorting to quotas. The member States of the European
Union would therefore vote against the draft
resolution.
55. At the request of the representative of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.33.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,A/C.3/66/SR.44
9 11-59348
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Chile, Nigeria.
56. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.33 was adopted by
119 votes to 52, with 2 abstentions.
57. Mr. Argüello (Argentina) said that his
Government supported the principle of equitable
geographical distribution in contexts where it was in
conformity with applicable international law. His
delegation had voted in favour of the draft resolution
on the understanding that its recommendations must be
interpreted in accordance with international law,
without prejudice to the full independence of human
rights treaty bodies, which functioned according to the
conventions under which they had been established.
Each convention established the obligations of States
parties and the principles governing the selection of
treaty body experts.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.36: Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures
58. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
59. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that the
Non-Aligned Movement had expressed on various
occasions its opposition to the use of unilateral
coercive measures as tools for exerting political
pressure against any country, especially developing
countries, which must not be deprived of the means of
development. Since the introduction of the draft
resolution, China had become a sponsor. The current
version of the draft resolution, which was introduced
on an annual basis, contained technical updates and
new references to ageing persons and persons with
disabilities.
60. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of vote before voting, said that
his delegation had called for a vote because it believed
that the draft resolution had no basis in international
law and did not serve the cause of promoting and
protecting human rights, a responsibility that fell to
States. The text of the draft resolution was a direct
challenge to the right of sovereign States to freely
conduct their economic relations and protect legitimate
national interests, including taking actions in response
to national security concerns. It also attempted to
undermine the international community’s ability to
respond to acts that were offensive to international
norms. Unilateral and multilateral sanctions were a
legitimate means to achieve foreign policy, security
and other legitimate national and international
objectives, a view that his country was not alone in
holding or putting into practice.
61. At the request of the delegation of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.36.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,A/C.3/66/SR.44
11-59348 10
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
62. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.36 was adopted by
121 votes to 52, with 1 abstention.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.40: International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
63. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
64. Mr. Argüello (Argentina), speaking also on
behalf of France and Morocco, said that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, Belize, Cameroon,
the Comoros, Grenada, Honduras, India, Mali, Senegal,
Serbia, Tunisia and Ukraine had joined the sponsors.
Five years after its adoption by the General Assembly,
the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance had entered into
force in December 2010 and currently had
90 signatures and 30 ratifications. The Convention was
the first universal, legally binding instrument to
recognize that enforced disappearance could constitute
a crime against humanity and to reaffirm the right of
victims to reparation, justice and truth.
65. Efforts must be made to achieve the universal
ratification and implementation of the Convention, as it
would be naive to imagine that history would not
repeat itself. Enforced disappearance, secret detentions
and extrajudicial executions on State orders continued
to occur, and few of those responsible were brought to
justice over them. His own country’s recent tragic
history attested to that fact.
66. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Nicaragua, the Niger and Nigeria had joined the
sponsors.
67. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.40 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.41: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
68. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
69. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, over 91 Member
States had joined the sponsors, proving that the
international community acknowledged the challenges
and opportunities that globalization presented. The
unequal distribution of its benefits and the impact of its
challenges were unfavourable for developing countries
and in turn affected their ability to promote and protect
human rights and fundamental freedoms. It was
unfortunate that certain delegations had refused to
engage in a constructive dialogue to resolve their
fundamental problems with the concept set forth in the
text, despite the sponsors’ willingness to do so.
70. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Antigua and Barbuda, Jamaica and
Saint Kitts and Nevis had become sponsors.
71. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking in
explanation of vote before voting on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
Iceland, Montenegro, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey; the stabilization and
association process countries Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; and, in addition, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Liechtenstein, Norway, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said that the
European Union could not support the draft resolution,
which, regrettably, remained the same as the previousA/C.3/66/SR.44
11 11-59348
year’s draft. Dealing with the effects of globalization — a
multidimensional phenomenon — was high on the
agenda of the European Union. While the challenges
faced in the world were increasingly of a global nature,
globalization could also offer means to tackle some of
the most acute problems as well as great opportunities
for stimulating growth and prosperity worldwide, thus
contributing to the promotion and protection of human
rights.
72. The European Union acknowledged that
globalization could have an impact on the full
enjoyment of human rights; however, the draft
resolution inaccurately stated that globalization
adversely affected the full enjoyment of all human
rights, a generalization that the European Union could
not subscribe to. The relationship between human
rights and globalization — which in certain instances
could be a positive one — must be assessed on a case-
by-case basis.
73. At the request of the representative of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.41.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
None.
74. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.41 was adopted by
125 votes to 52.
75. Mr. Tagle (Chile) said that his delegation had
voted in favour of the draft resolution on the
understanding that globalization presented both
benefits, which his country, with its open economy, had
certainly reaped, and challenges, which must be
addressed in solidarity by all Member States.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.46: Effective promotion of
the Declaration of the Rights of Persons Belonging to
National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities
76. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
77. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Panama had become a sponsor of the draft
resolution.
78. Ms. Ploder (Austria) said that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, Brazil, Greece,
Haiti, Japan, Lithuania, the Netherlands, the Niger and
San Marino had joined the sponsors. She read outA/C.3/66/SR.44
11-59348 12
revisions to the text. In the third preambular paragraph,
the words “involving them” had been replaced by the
phrase “involving the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities”.
Paragraph 4 had been reworded to read “Calls upon
States to give special attention to the situation and
specific needs of women and children belonging to
minorities, while promoting and protecting the rights
of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities”. Paragraph 15 had been
deleted. In paragraph 21, the words “together with” had
been replaced with “as well as”, the word “further” had
been inserted before “encourages States” and the word
“parties” had been inserted after “States”. The last
phrase of that paragraph thus read “and further
encourages States parties to give serious consideration
to the follow-up to treaty body recommendations on
the matter;”.
79. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Latvia, the Russian Federation and Uruguay had
joined the sponsors.
80. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.46, as orally revised,
was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.47/Rev.1: Combating
intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization,
discrimination, incitement to violence and violence
against persons, based on religion or belief
81. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
82. Mr. Al-Yafei (United Arab Emirates), speaking
on behalf of the member States of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC), said that Australia, Brazil,
Senegal and Thailand had joined the sponsors.
83. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
Iceland, Montenegro, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey; the stabilization and
association process countries Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; and, in addition, Armenia,
Azergaijan, Georgia, Liechtenstein, Norway, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said that ongoing
dialogue about the important issues of tolerance,
non-discrimination, freedom of expression and of
thought, conscience and religion or belief was the only
way to overcome existing divergences and
misperceptions. The European Union welcomed the
positive atmosphere in which those issues had been
discussed.
84. He noted, however, that, rather than refer to
religious and cultural diversity specifically, the draft
resolution should use the more inclusive concept of
diversity in general, since individuals had multiple
sources of identity. To effectively combat intolerance,
all aspects of diversity must be taken into account, and,
as in the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, no one might invoke cultural diversity to
infringe upon human rights guaranteed by international
law, nor limit their scope. The European Union
understood that religious hatred was primarily a threat
to individual freedoms at the local and national levels.
Viewing the world as composed of monolithic cultural
and religious blocks was of concern as that could divert
attention away from the responsibility of national and
local authorities to safeguard individual rights,
especially those of minority communities or groups.
85. The European Union condemned attacks on
religious sites, but emphasized that the Committee
should focus on individuals and the protection of their
rights and noted that all States must fulfil their
obligations under existing international human rights
treaties to protect individuals against discrimination
and violence on the basis of their religion or belief. In
particular, all persons belonging to religious
communities and minorities should be able to practise
their religion and worship freely without fear of
intolerance or attacks. Also, the draft resolution under
consideration explicitly mentioned the establishment of
one centre for interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
whereas there were numerous such centres around the
world and all comparable initiatives should be
acknowledged. Despite those issues, European Union
members, in a spirit of cooperation, were in a position
to join consensus.
86. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his country was pleased to join the consensus on the
draft resolution, which it hoped would be a blueprint
for further action. For some years, his country had
shared the stated concerns of the sponsors and others
about intolerance, discrimination and violence directed
against persons on the basis of their religion and belief.
It was a serious concern that such problems persisted in
the world.A/C.3/66/SR.44
13 11-59348
87. In the past, the United States had not been able to
support the sponsors’ efforts to address those problems
because of their excessive reliance on seeking to
restrict expression as a means to combat intolerance,
discrimination and violence based on religion or belief.
That was counterproductive and exacerbated the very
problems that the draft resolutions sought to address.
In various parts of the world, laws that criminalized
offensive expression had been misused by
Governments to persecute political opponents and
minorities. In some cases, those who had engaged in
violence or murder on grounds of religion had pointed
to such laws as justification for their actions.
88. However, in line with Human Rights Council
resolution 16/18, the draft resolution provided for the
criminalization of expression in only one circumstance:
incitement to imminent violence. The draft resolution
recognized that the only solution to offensive
expression was more expression, not laws that
restricted expression in the name of tolerance. His
country welcomed any initiative that upheld respect for
universal human rights and recommended measures
such as education or awareness-building to promote
interfaith harmony in combating discrimination against
individuals on the basis of religion or belief.
89. Such initiatives could promote respect for
religious diversity in a manner that respected universal
human rights. Each Member State must endeavour to
implement the recommendations in the draft resolution,
and all Governments must take assertive measures to
uphold international obligations and promote
awareness and understanding of the issues that it
addressed. Member States must provide updates on
their efforts to that end as part of ongoing reporting to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
90. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.47/Rev.1 was
adopted.
91. Mr. Quinlan (Australia) said that the draft
resolution was important to Australia, which was vastly
diverse and where any violence on the basis of
religion, ethnicity or cultural belief was a direct threat
to the health of its society as a whole. His Government
was endeavouring to ensure that all persons could
celebrate and practise their religion or belief free from
discrimination, including through its multicultural and
multilingual public broadcasting service, as the media
could play an important role in helping to promote and
celebrate the multicultural nature of society. It had also
recently launched a new multicultural policy, involving
community-led strategies to encourage tolerance.
Australia had participated in interfaith dialogue and
was negotiating a practical joint programme with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, which it
commended for its historic achievement.
92. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her country wished to
become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.48/Rev.1: Elimination of all
forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on
religion or belief
93. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
94. Mr. Herczyński (Poland) said that Costa Rica,
New Zealand, Thailand and Ukraine had become
sponsors of the draft resolution.
95. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Benin, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic, the
Philippines, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Uruguay had joined
the sponsors.
96. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.48/Rev.1 was
adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.52/Rev.1: Protection
of migrants
97. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
98. Ms. Dias (Mexico) said that Bangladesh, Belize,
Burkina Faso, Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, Indonesia
and Portugal had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
99. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Cote d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, Mali,
Morocco, Niger, Senegal, Tunisia and Turkey had also
joined the sponsors.
100. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.52/Rev.1 was
adopted.
101. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the Union had joined the
consensus on the draft resolution and remained firmly
committed to protecting migrants’ rights by taking aA/C.3/66/SR.44
11-59348 14
balanced approach and applying the rule of law. The
human rights of migrant children, particularly those
who were unaccompanied, was paramount.
102. The European Union respected and upheld the
human rights of migrants regardless of their status, and
while some migrants were not automatically granted
the right to reside in European Union member States,
their rights were respected.
103. It was a priority of the Union to combat certain
migration flows, especially those of human trafficking
networks, and a number of its member States had
introduced criminal penalties in that regard. Drawing
attention to the concern referred to in paragraph 3 (b)
about legislative measures and practices that might
restrict the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
migrants, he noted that the application of criminal
sanctions for those migrants who breached national
criminal law did not affect their rights to a fair trial.
104. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his delegation had joined the consensus on the draft
resolution. The principle in international law that all
States had the sovereign right to control admission to
their territory and regulate the admission and expulsion
of foreign nationals was implicit in any discussion of
migration. At the same time, States must respect the
human rights of migrants consistent with their
obligations under international law, including
international human rights law. His Government took
that responsibility seriously and provided substantial
protections under its Constitution and other laws to
aliens within its territory regardless of their
immigration status. In addressing migration on a global
scale, it was inappropriate to refer to a bilateral legal
matter in the draft resolution, such as in the ninth
preambular paragraph, as that diverted attention from
the multilateral reflection and action required and did
not help to advance the protection of the human rights
of migrants.
105. His country had a long history of welcoming
immigrants and refugees and valued legal, orderly and
humane migration. It urged all its citizens to respect
the relevant local and national laws when living or
working in another country. His country welcomed
legal immigrants and properly-documented temporary
visitors, including workers and students and was
committed to protecting the human rights of migrants
within its borders as well as to ending racism and racial
discrimination, upholding the human rights of all
people and combating xenophobia, intolerance and
bigotry. Lastly, paragraph 3(a) should not be
misinterpreted to inhibit freedom of expression or to
express policy views or even hateful attitudes or
philosophies, but must be interpreted in the light of
robust international legal protections for freedom of
expression.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.53/Rev.1: Follow-up to the
International Year of Human Rights Learning
106. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
107. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Brazil, the Republic of Korea and Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines had joined the sponsors.
108. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin), speaking on behalf of
the African Group and other sponsors, said that
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Cyprus, France,
Germany, Greece, Guinea, Hungary, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Luxembourg, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Slovenia, Spain,
Thailand and Turkey had joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
109. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Barbados, Belarus,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Mali, Mexico,
Montenegro, Nicaragua, the Philippines, the Republic
of Moldova, the Russian Federation, Serbia,
Switzerland and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
110. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.53/Rev.1 was
adopted.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.