United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.48
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
24 December 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-60277 (E)
*0760277*
=
Third Committee
Summary record of the 48th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 19 November 2007, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 68: Elimination of racism and racial discrimination (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 66: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.48
07-60277 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.82)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.82: Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa
1. Mr. Jesus (Angola), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of African States,
said that it addressed the needs of the over 14.2 million
Africans who were refugees, returnees or displaced
persons. Even though the situation in some areas of
Africa had improved considerably over the past year,
the rest of the continent remained susceptible to
conflicts and natural disasters and the number of
people fleeing their homes to live in deplorable
conditions in camps was increasing.
2. The current year’s draft resolution highlighted the
situation of children at risk in the hope that States, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and all other relevant actors would
strengthen the protection of children who were asylum-
seekers, refugees, internally displaced, returnees or
stateless and assisted by UNHCR or under its
protection. Noting that consultations were ongoing, he
expressed the hope that the draft resolution would not
only achieve the consensus it had enjoyed in previous
years, but also attract the support of other delegations
outside the region, in order to send an even stronger
message of support to that vulnerable group.
3. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Guinea wished to join in sponsoring the
draft resolution.
Agenda item 68: Elimination of racism and racial
discrimination (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.65)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.65: From rhetoric to reality:
a global call for concrete action against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
4. Mr. Hayee (Pakistan), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said
that the greatest challenge facing the United Nations
system and, indeed, the human race was how to tackle
war and intolerance, poverty and underdevelopment,
economic and racial injustice, and hatred in all its
manifestations. The Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action had provided a solid basis for the international
community to work together for the total elimination of
racism in all its forms and manifestations. It was
regrettable that the world was experiencing resurgent
and violent forms of racism. Racial and religious
hatred were assuming new dimensions.
5. Since the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance, there had been more than enough rhetoric.
States must demonstrate their commitment to offer
greater protection to victims of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance. In
particular, they must guarantee them maximum remedy
and safeguards and adopt a policy of zero tolerance
with regard to impunity for acts of racism. Lastly,
tangible progress must be made on all key undertakings
before the Durban Review Conference in 2009.
6. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Russian Federation wished to join
in sponsoring the draft resolution.
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-determination
(continued) (A/C.3/62/L.63)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.63: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
7. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Belgium, Bulgaria, Estonia,
Latvia, Malta, Monaco, the Russian Federation and
Spain had joined the sponsors.
8. For over four decades, the Palestinian people had
been suffering from Israeli occupation and denied their
basic human rights in a flagrant violation of
international law. The continued denial of their
legitimate aspiration to self-determination, by
oppressive and brutal means, compelled his delegation
once again to submit the draft resolution in question.
9. The text was essentially the same as that of the
resolution adopted at the previous session; one new
preambular paragraph stressed the need for respect for
and preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and
integrity of all of the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem. That element was central forA/C.3/62/SR.48
3 07-60277
the attainment and exercise by the Palestinian people
of their right to self-determination, for it was only
upon such Territory that they could establish their
independent, sovereign and viable State, alongside the
State of Israel.
10. His delegation hoped that Member States would
send a strong message of solidarity and encouragement
to the Palestinian people by adopting the draft
resolution by consensus. International support for such
an important resolution would contribute to the
ultimate realization of the Palestinian people’s
inalienable and long-overdue right to self-
determination on their own land and in their own
independent, sovereign and viable State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
11. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Montenegro, Mozambique, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Suriname and the United Republic of
Tanzania also wished to join in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.64
and L.67)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.64: Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
12. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution had no programme budget implications.
13. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, Japan, Lebanon
and Romania wished to join in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
14. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.64 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.67: Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
15. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution had no programme budget implications.
16. Ms. Wandel (Denmark), speaking on behalf of
the Nordic countries, said that Azerbaijan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cape Verde, Dominica,
Eritrea, Haiti, Madagascar, Mauritania, Mozambique,
the Niger, the Philippines, the Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Swaziland, Tajikistan and
Tunisia had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
Furthermore, in paragraph 18, the phrase “and, in
particular, the need to address in this process the root
causes of refugee movements in order to avert new flows
of refugees” should be added after “refugee problems”.
17. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Bahamas, China, the Gambia and
Sri Lanka also wished to join in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
18. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), with regard to the
reference to “regional organizations” in paragraph 19
of the draft resolution, said that her delegation would
have preferred the sponsors to include the phrase “as
appropriate” in order to reflect the fact that Cuba was
not a member of the regional organization for the
American continent.
19. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.67, as orally revised,
was adopted.
20. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation had joined the consensus on the adoption of
the draft resolution on of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) contained in
document A/C.3/62/L.67 because of its belief in the
importance of providing a life of dignity for refugees
and forcibly displaced persons until their hope of
returning to their homelands was realized in accordance
with all international, humanitarian and moral laws.
Though the refugee question might outwardly appear to
be a humanitarian issue, it was in essence a purely
political issue and it was in that context that her
delegation had joined the consensus. Her country had not
acceded to the 1951 Convention on the Status of Refugees
or the related 1967 Protocol but it would continue to
cooperate with the United Nations, including UNHCR,
in order to facilitate assistance to refugees and internally
displaced person in accordance with Syrian domestic
law. The international community, while fully aware of
the burden for her country of the assistance provided to
refugees within its territory, whose number had reached
2 million or 12 per cent of the population, had thus far
taken no steps to extend a helping hand, despite several
international conferences on the question.
21. Ms. Rodríguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) welcomed the fact that the draft resolution
had been adopted by consensus. The Office of theA/C.3/62/SR.48
07-60277 4
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees did a
very important job. In particular, she welcomed the
inclusion in the draft resolution of text highlighting the
need to address the root causes of refugee movements
in order to avert new flows of refugees and stressed the
importance of respecting the agreements reached at the
April 2007 conference in Geneva. She conveyed her
appreciation to all delegations for their support and
flexibility, particularly those that had presented
alternative texts, and expressed the hope that the spirit
of good faith that had enabled the draft resolution to be
adopted by consensus would continue in the future.
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/62/L.14/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.14/Rev.1: Violence against
women migrant workers
22. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution had no programme budget implications.
23 Ms. Banzon-Abalos (Philippines) said that,
following a series of informal consultations, her
delegation was submitting an improved version of the
draft resolution for action. The draft resolution stressed
the shared responsibility of all States in cooperation with
international organizations and civil society in measures
to prevent and address violence against women who
migrated all over the world for work and stressed that,
regardless of their immigration status, the human rights of
women migrant workers should always be protected and
respected. Lastly, she announced that Costa Rica and
Uruguay had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
24. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bangladesh, Benin, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ghana, Haiti, Mexico,
Nicaragua, the Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Sri Lanka
also wished to join in sponsoring the draft resolution.
25. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.14/Rev.1 was adopted.
Agenda item 66: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.21/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.21/Rev.1: Supporting
efforts to end obstetric fistula
26. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution had no programme budget implications.
27. Ms. Sow (Senegal), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.21/Rev.1, recalled that Millennium
Development Goal 5 consisted in reducing the maternal
mortality rate. Every minute, 20 women suffered injuries
and one died as a result of pregnancy complications.
Obstetric fistula, which affected millions of women, was
a major but avoidable cause of such health problems.
National health systems were unable to cope with that
situation. Accordingly, awareness of the issue should be
enhanced and the efforts of the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA) and its partners in the area of obstetric
fistula prevention and treatment should be strengthened.
28. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Afghanistan, Algeria, Belize, Burundi,
Ethiopia, Grenada, Liechtenstein, Malta, Moldova,
Montenegro, Peru, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Serbia, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Sweden and Uzbekistan wished to
join the list of sponsors.
29. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.21/Rev.l was adopted.
30. Ms. Norin (United States of America), explaining
her delegation’s position, said that her country understood
references to the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and their five- and ten-year reviews not to
create any right to abortion or to constitute support for
abortion. States had no duty to fulfil obligations under
human rights instruments to which they were not a
party. Moreover, there was international consensus that
the term “sexual and reproductive health” did not
include abortion or constitute support for abortion or
use of abortifacients. Furthermore, the draft resolution
did not create a new internationally agreed Millennium
Development Goal. Lastly, the Global Campaign to
End Fistula launched by UNFPA was one of a number
of options available to Member States that wished to
contribute to ending obstetric fistula.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.31, L.39, L.45,
L.46, L.48, L.50, L.52, L.54 and L.55)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.31: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of human rights
31. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution had no programme budget implications.A/C.3/62/SR.48
5 07-60277
32. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.31 on behalf of the original sponsors and
Afghanistan, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Ecuador, Mauritania,
Suriname, Tunisia and Venezuela, said that the text did
not prejudge the course of globalization or formulate
value judgements but addressed the multidimensional
intricacy of globalization, its impact on humanity and
the need to optimize the enjoyment of all human rights
in view of communication technology advances. The
objective was to enable the international community to
respond more effectively to global opportunities and
challenges by offsetting any negative aspects of
globalization through constructive dialogue.
33. Mr. Strigelsky (Belarus) said that the link
between globalization and human rights was central to
the text, which focused on reducing the divide between
rich and poor and ensuring sustained economic growth.
34. At the request of the representative of the United
States, a recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.31.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Brazil, Chile, Singapore
35. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.31 was adopted by
112 votes to 52, with 3 abstentions.*
36. Ms. Carvalho (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey; the
stabilization and association process countries Albania,
Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition, Georgia,
Liechtenstein and Moldova, said that the European
Union could not support draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.31.
Dealing with globalization and its effects in a
comprehensive manner was high on the agenda of the
European Union, which acknowledged that globalization
could have an impact on the exercise of human rights.
However, the draft resolution inaccurately implied that
globalization had a negative effect on the enjoyment of
rights as a whole. Although currently its benefits were
not evenly shared, globalization could help to tackle
the world’s most acute problems, including extreme
poverty, by stimulating growth. It could thereby
contribute to the promotion and protection of human
rights. Moreover, there were human rights and
fundamental freedoms that were not affected by
globalization. Regrettably, the sponsors had not
engaged in consultations in order to bridge the gap
between the text and the views of other delegations.
* The delegation of Gabon subsequently informed the
Committee that it had intended to vote in favour of the
draft resolution.A/C.3/62/SR.48
07-60277 6
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.39: Human rights and
cultural diversity
37. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution had no programme budget implications.
38. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
reminded the Committee of the revisions made to the
draft resolution at the time of its introduction.
39. Mr. Emadi (Islamic Republic of Iran),
introducing draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.39 on behalf of
the original sponsors and Afghanistan, Angola,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Benin, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Gambia, India, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, the Niger, Nigeria, Qatar, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand and Tunisia,
said that respect for diversity facilitated the universal
promotion and protection of human rights. The text
currently before the Committee was almost the same as
the resolution approved by consensus in 2006 and its
adoption would be an important step towards
strengthening tolerance within and between nations.
40. Mr. Strigelsky (Belarus) said that respect for the
historical, cultural and religious particularities of States
was a prerequisite for effective dialogue on human
rights. His country valued the outcome of the Non-
Aligned Movement Ministerial Meeting on Human
Rights and Cultural Diversity held in September 2007
and supported the draft resolution.
41. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.39, as orally revised,
was adopted.
42. Ms. Carvalho (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Turkey; the stabilization and association process
countries Albania, Montenegro and Serbia; and, in
addition, Georgia, Liechtenstein, Moldova and
Norway, said that the European Union understood the
draft resolution to recognize that, with all their
diversity, all cultures shared a set of universal values,
including the inherent dignity and inalienable rights of
all human beings, as the foundation of freedom, justice
and peace. Accordingly, the European Union saw draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.39 as a commitment to the
principle that no culture, belief, religion, or doctrine
could stand above the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of each individual, including the right to life,
freedom from torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, freedom of religion or belief
and the right not to be discriminated against on any
grounds. States, regardless of their political, economic
and cultural systems, had a duty to promote and protect
all human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
individuals. The European Union noted that the draft
resolution sought to promote cultural human rights;
appreciated the sponsors’ efforts to streamline the text
and to accommodate some pressing concerns; and
concurred with the emphasis on the need to freely use
the media and new information and communication
technologies. It was on that basis that the European
Union had joined the consensus.
43. Ms. Norin (United States of America) noted that,
in joining the consensus, her delegation interpreted the
right of everyone to take part in cultural life and to
enjoy the benefits of scientific progress as being based
on mutually agreed terms. Such a right could be
exercised only in conjunction with any author’s right to
the protection of the moral and material interest
resulting from his or her scientific, literary or artistic
production in line with article 27, paragraph 2, of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.45: Human rights in the
administration of justice
44. The Chairman informed the Committee that the
draft resolution had no programme budget implications.
45. Ms. Nguyen (Austria), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.45 on behalf of the original
sponsors and Albania, Andorra, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Benin, Brazil, Cape Verde, Costa Rica, Denmark,
the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, France, Gambia,
Haiti, Honduras, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nigeria, Paraguay, the Philippines, the Republic of
South Korea, Serbia, Switzerland, Thailand, the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine and
Uruguay, said that the draft resolution was procedural.
It referred to the Secretary-General’s report on human
rights in the administration of justice, including
juvenile justice (A/HRC/4/102), and invited the
competent United Nations bodies to continue the
consideration of those issues and to pursue appropriate
activities in that area.
46. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.45 was adopted.A/C.3/62/SR.48
7 07-60277
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.46: Effective promotion of
the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to
National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities
47. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
48. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Burundi, China, Iraq, Mali and Moldova
had also become sponsors of the draft resolution.
49. Ms. Nguyen (Austria), introducing the draft
resolution, said that it was mostly procedural in nature
and called on the General Assembly to continue at its
sixty-third session consideration of the effective
promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons
Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and
Linguistic Minorities.
50. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.46 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.48: Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights
51. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
52. Mr. Ferrer Arenas (Cuba), speaking on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, introduced
the draft resolution, which would reaffirm commitment
to international cooperation in the field of human rights.
He hoped that it would be adopted without a vote.
53. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.48 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.50: Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures
54. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
55. Mr. Ferrer Arenas (Cuba), speaking on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, introduced
the draft resolution. Unilateral coercive measures, with
a negative impact on trade and international relations,
continued to be applied, despite recommendations from
the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and
major United Nations Conferences. He hoped that
Member States would adopt the draft resolution in
support of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
56. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.50.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.
Abstaining:
None.A/C.3/62/SR.48
07-60277 8
57. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.50 was adopted by
122 votes to 52.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.52: Promotion of peace as
a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of all human
rights by all
58. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
59. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bangladesh, Benin, Chad, Comoros,
the Gambia, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger had joined
the sponsors of the draft resolution.
60. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.52.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Chile, Mexico, Samoa,
Singapore.
61. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.52 was adopted by
114 votes to 52, with 6 abstentions.
62. Ms. Carvalho (Portugal), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, said that its members had voted against
the draft resolution because the text assumed that peace
was a prerequisite for the realization and fulfilment of
human rights of all peoples and considered only the
obligations and relationships between States in
promoting peace. It failed to acknowledge the State’s
obligations towards its citizens, which was the core
mandate of the Third Committee and the Human Rights
Council. Although the promotion of peace and
realization of human rights were linked, the issue
should be dealt with in the appropriate forums.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.54: Strengthening United
Nations action in the field of human rights through the
promotion of international cooperation and the
importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity
63. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
64. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Bangladesh, Bolivia, Cambodia, El Salvador,
Lesotho, the Niger and Uzbekistan had joined the list
of sponsors. Cuba had been omitted from the original
list of sponsors.
65. Mr. Ferrer Arenas (Cuba) said that Honduras
had also joined the list of sponsors. International
cooperation in the field of human rights could be
achieved only by an approach which was non-selective,
impartial and objective, and he urged all Member
States to support the draft resolution.
66. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.54 was adopted.A/C.3/62/SR.48
9 07-60277
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.55: Respect for the
purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations to achieve international cooperation in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and for fundamental freedoms and in solving
international problems of a humanitarian character
67. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
68. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Benin, Bolivia and Sierra Leone had
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
69. Mr. Ferrer Arenas (Cuba) said that the draft
resolution reflected the commitment of Member States
to the purposes and principles contained in the Charter
of the United Nations. As a firm supporter of
multilateralism, his delegation urged all Member States
to vote for the draft resolution.
70. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.55.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Cameroon, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Chile,
Nauru, Paraguay, Peru, Singapore, Thailand,
Uruguay.
71. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.55 was adopted by
102 votes to 53, with 11 abstentions.
72. Ms. Carvalho (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, Montenegro, Moldova, Serbia, Turkey and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia aligned
themselves with her statement of explanation after the
vote. The European Union was opposed to the selective
use and quotation of the Charter of the United Nations
in the draft resolution. Given that one of the main aims
of the United Nations was to promote and encourage
respect for human rights, it could not accept the
inference in the draft resolution that those rights could
be promoted and protected in disrespect of the Charter.
It remained unconvinced that the Third Committee was
the right forum to examine that issue and regretted that
the Cuban delegation had showed no willingness to
discuss it in advance.
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (A/C.3/L.36/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/L.36/Rev.1: Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional
Protocol
73. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria had been omitted from the list of original
sponsors of the draft resolution.A/C.3/62/SR.48
07-60277 10
74. Regarding the financial implications of the draft
resolution and with reference to paragraph 4 thereof, he
said that in paragraph 23.37 of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009
(A/64/6 (sect. 23)) the Secretary-General had informed
the General Assembly that, should the Optional
Protocol enter into force during the biennium 2008-
2009, Member States would be informed of the
budgetary implications in accordance with established
procedures. Should the draft resolution be adopted by
the General Assembly, no additional appropriations
would be required at that time.
75. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico), speaking also on behalf of
New Zealand and Sweden, said that Ghana,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Norway, Peru and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution. The Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional
Protocol had been open for ratification for only seven
months and had already been signed by two thirds of
the States Members of the United Nations. In order to
maintain that positive momentum, all States which had
not already signed the instruments should be
encouraged to do so as soon as possible. Given that
seven Member States had ratified the Convention, and
that the Convention needed 20 instruments of
ratification before entering into force, it was vital to
pave the way for the entry into force of both
instruments. The draft resolution therefore requested
the Secretary-General to provide the necessary staff
and facilities to support Member States’ efforts in that
respect. United Nations agencies and organizations, as
well as intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, were also asked to assist States parties in
implementing their obligations under the instruments.
76. Finally, Member States should involve civil
society in their preparations for the entry into force and
the implementation of the Convention, which was the
outcome of cooperation between Governments and
civil society.
77. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Barbados, Benin, Brazil, Cambodia, Chad,
Colombia, Comoros, Cyprus, the Gambia, Grenada,
Guinea, Lebanon, Lesotho, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
the Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand and the
United Republic of Tanzania had joined the list of
sponsors.
78. Ms. Nassau (Australia) said that her country had
signed the Convention on the very day it had been
opened for signature, demonstrating its commitment to
the rights of persons with disabilities. Her country was
at present undertaking the legislative scrutiny that was
necessary before the Convention could be ratified.
79. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.36/Rev.1 was adopted.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.