United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.15
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
15 November 2010
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-58163 (E)
*1058163*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 15th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 14 October 2010, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Ms. Melon (Vice-Chair) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Argentina)
Contents
Agenda item 105: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 106: International drug control (continued)
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children
(b) Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on childrenA/C.3/65/SR.15
10-58163 2
In the absence of Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon),
Ms. Melon (Argentina), Vice-Chair, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 105: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued) (A/C.3/65/L.15)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.15: Strengthening the
United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice Programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity
1. Mr. Mogini (Italy), introducing the draft
resolution, said that the text updated those of previous
years, underlining the increasing links between
transnational organized crime and other destabilizing
factors, and the impact they had on the development of
stable societies and the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. It focused on the initiatives and
achievements of the recent high-level meeting on
transnational organized crime and the special treaty
event, the adoption of the Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons and the political
declaration adopted by the Twelfth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. It
also anticipated the successful outcome of the fifth
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and expressed concern regarding the overall
financial situation of UNODC.
2. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Chile, El Salvador, Guatemala and
Uruguay had become sponsors of the draft resolution.
Agenda item 106: International drug control
(continued) (A/C.3/65/L.16)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.16: International
cooperation against the world drug problem
3. Mr. Sánchez Contreras (Mexico), introducing
the draft resolution, said that Argentina, Chile,
Colombia, Guatemala, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan and
Peru had joined the sponsors. The text stated the
concerns of the international community and the
repercussions that drugs had on society and proposed
forms of cooperation to combat the problem. The draft
resolution included new paragraphs that expressed
concern at the increase in production and consumption
of illegal drugs and that highlighted the importance of
HIV prevention programmes for drug users, the
adequate availability of internationally controlled licit
drugs, and the need to exchange information on drug
trafficking trends and to increase the budget of the
UNODC. Finally, it acknowledged the steps taken by
governments to comply with the three Conventions on
drug control and the Palermo and Merida Conventions,
and urged all Member States that had not yet done so,
to ratify and implement those agreements.
4. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Algeria, El Salvador and Uruguay had
become sponsors of the draft resolution.
Agenda item 105: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued) (A/C.3/65/L.14 and L.15)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.14: United Nations African
Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders
5. Ms. Karim (Malawi) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of African States.
Agenda item 106: International drug control
(continued) (A/C.3/65/L.2, L.3, L.4, L.5, L.6 and L.13)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.13: Realignment of the
functions of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and changes to the strategic framework
6. The Chair invited the Committee to consider
draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.13 on the basis of the
Committee’s agreement to merge the text of draft
resolutions A/C.3/65/L.2 and A/C.3/65/L.3.
7. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, said that when
resolutions 18/6 and 52/14 had been adopted, the
Commissions had been informed that an independent
evaluation unit would be established under the Office
of the Executive Director, to be funded partly through
the redeployment of resources from the programme
budget of the United Nations and partly through
voluntary contributions. It had been proposed to
redeploy the vacant programme budget post at the P-5
level of Chief of the Strategic Planning Unit, allocated
under subprogramme 2, to executive direction and
management. In addition to the P-5 post funded under
the programme budget, voluntary contributions would
be required to fund five other posts to ensure theA/C.3/65/SR.15
3 10-58163
effective and operational functioning of the
independent evaluation unit (one P-4, one P-3, one P-2
and two General Service staff). That would require
$1,560,000 per biennium to be funded from voluntary
contributions. The current level of voluntary
contributions available for evaluation was $800,000, so
an additional $760,000 would be needed to ensure the
effective functioning of the independent evaluation
unit in 2010-2011.
8. In accordance with those proposals, the P-5 post
had been redeployed and would be regularized in the
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 should
the General Assembly endorse the permanent move of
the post. In the meantime, the recruitment process had
been initiated. The unit currently comprised one P-4
and one General Service staff member, funded from
voluntary contributions. A Junior Professional Officer
post would be filled before the end of 2010.
9. As a result of the reassignment of the P-5 post,
the Strategic Planning Unit was currently fully funded
from voluntary contributions and consisted of one P-4
post, one P-3 post and a General Service post. To
ensure the proper functioning of the Strategic Planning
Unit, additional resources for six more posts would be
needed (one P-5, one P-4, one P-3, one P-2 and two
General Service posts) and an operational budget. That
would represent $1,680,000 per biennium, to be funded
from voluntary contributions. The current level of
voluntary contributions available for strategic planning
was $739,200, so an additional $940,800 would be
required to ensure the effective functioning of the Unit
in 2010-2011.
10. The budgetary requirements resulting from
resolutions adopted by the Economic and Social
Council at its substantive session of 2010 included the
“realignment of the functions of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and changes to the strategic
framework” and was before the General Assembly, in
accordance with established procedures.
11. The resource requirements for the biennium
2012-2013 would be reviewed in accordance with
established budgetary procedures. The adoption of
draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.13 therefore would not
entail any programme budget implications for the
biennium 2010-2011.
12. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.13 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.4: Strengthening crime
prevention and criminal justice responses to violence
against women
13. The Chair invited the Committee to take action
on draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.4, which had been
recommended for adoption by the Economic and Social
Council.
14. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, said that the
adoption of operative paragraph 19 of the draft
resolution would entail extrabudgetary resources of
$455,800 to develop online training modules for
relevant professionals and a guide for legislators and
policymakers based on the revised and updated Model
Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination of
Violence against Women in the Field of Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice.
15. The level of resource requirements would also
provide for general temporary assistance to cover
additional planning, implementing and backstopping
work and to provide support for technical assistance
and advisory services to Member States, and a three-
day expert group meeting in Vienna.
16. The adoption of draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.4
therefore would not entail any programme budget
implications for the biennium 2010-2011.
17. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.4 was adopted.
18. Mr. Siddique (Pakistan) said that his delegation
welcomed the adoption of draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.4. Pakistan had been engaged in
negotiating the updated Model Strategies and Practical
Measures on the Elimination of Violence against
Women in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, annexed to the draft resolution. The adoption
of the draft resolution did not imply a new mandate for
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). Over the years, the Government of Pakistan
had undertaken numerous steps towards the promotion
and protection of women’s human rights, in particular
ending violence against women, and would continue to
work on the updated strategies, in accordance with its
obligations under the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
national legislation.A/C.3/65/SR.15
10-58163 4
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.5: United Nations Rules for
the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial
Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules)
19. The Chair invited the Committee to take action
on draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.5, which had been
recommended for adoption by the Economic and Social
Council.
20. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, said that it was
envisaged that additional extrabudgetary resources of
$274,300 would be required to implement the activities
relating to operative paragraphs 10 and 11 of the draft
resolution. That level of resource requirements would
provide for: general temporary assistance to cover
planning, implementing and backstopping work;
consultancy services and assistance for the
development of online training modules based on the
adopted United Nations Rules for the Treatment of
Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for
Women Offenders; the organization of the expert group
meeting in Vienna; and official travel and assistance
for staff to provide technical assistance and advisory
service to Member States, upon request.
21. The adoption of draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.5
therefore would not entail any programme budget
implications for the biennium 2010-2011.
22. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.5 was adopted.
23. Mr. Siddique (Pakistan) said that his delegation
welcomed the adoption of draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.5. Pakistan had been engaged in the
process negotiating the adoption of the Bangkok Rules.
He hoped that the adoption of the draft resolution
would improve the treatment of women prisoners and
offenders worldwide. In line with its commitments, the
Government of Pakistan had worked to promote and
protect the human rights of women, including women
prisoners, and hoped to work on the Rules
incrementally in accordance with its obligations under
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and national legislation.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.6: Twelfth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
24. The Chair invited the Committee to take action
on draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.6, which had been
recommended for adoption by the Economic and Social
Council.
25. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, said that in order
to reflect the provisions of paragraph 9 of the draft
resolution, the narrative of subprogramme 1 of section
16 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011 would need to be modified. The following
output would need to be added under paragraph 16.55
(a) (iii) b: “report of the open-ended intergovernmental
expert group to conduct a comprehensive study on the
problem of cybercrime”.
26. An additional $135,700 would be required under
section 2 of the programme budget for the biennium
2010-2011 to implement the activities under paragraph 9,
including conference servicing, comprising interpretation
and documentation, for the 10 meetings of the open-
ended intergovernmental expert group. The Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management of
the Secretariat had indicated that those requirements
could only be met on an “if available” basis and the
modalities would have to be determined in consultation
between the Commission secretariat and the
Department to ensure that no additional conference
servicing resources would be required.
27. In order to reflect the provisions of paragraph 10,
the narrative of subprogramme 1 of section 16 of the
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 would
need to be modified. The following output would need
to be added under paragraph 16.55 (a) (iii) b: “report of
the open-ended intergovernmental expert group to
review the United Nations standards and norms in
crime prevention and criminal justice”.
28. Resources in the amount of $135,700 would be
required under section 2 of the programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011, to implement the activities
under paragraph 10, including conference servicing,
comprising interpretation and documentation, for the
10 meetings of the open-ended intergovernmental
expert group. The provision of those conference
services were subject to the same conditions as those
required for paragraph 9.
29. The financial implications for the biennium
2012-2013 would be considered in accordance with
established budgetary procedures. The adoption of
draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.6 therefore would notA/C.3/65/SR.15
5 10-58163
entail any programme budget implications for the
biennium 2010-2011.
30. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.6 was adopted.
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued) (A/65/336)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children (continued) (A/65/41, A/65/206,
A/65/219, A/65/262 and A/65/221)
(b) Follow-up to the outcome of the special session
on children (continued) (A/65/226)
31. Ms. Zhang Dan (China) said that in its
development strategies, her Government had aimed to
ensure children’s right to life, protection and
participation. China had accomplished the goals set
forth in its current ten-year plan for the development of
children and was currently preparing an outline for the
forthcoming 10 years.
32. Her Government had acceded to a series of
international treaties protecting the rights of the child,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its two Optional Protocols; furthermore, it had
fulfilled all its treaty obligations and prepared
comprehensive periodic reports in accordance with
treaty provisions. Its first report on the implementation
of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in
Armed Conflict would soon be submitted.
33. China’s cooperation with the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and other international
agencies had been long-standing and effective, yielding
positive results in terms of implementation of projects
in such areas as, inter alia, advocacy for knowledge
about children, policy development, health and
nutrition, child protection and community service, and
disaster prevention.
34. A developing country with a huge child
population, China recognized that it had a long way to
go before all its children could fully enjoy their rights,
hence its tireless efforts to strengthen the child
protection mechanism, improve the child welfare
system, and promote equal opportunity in education
and balanced development.
35. Mr. Ali (Sudan) said that North-South dialogue
involving the most and least developed countries was
of particular importance in attaining the aim of
strengthening child rights.
36. Building a world fit for children remained an
elusive goal, with the rates of infant mortality and
stunting due to malnutrition remaining high, especially
on the African continent. Efforts to halt the spread of
HIV/AIDS by 2015 also remained a significant
challenge.
37. Violence against children, especially in areas
affected by armed conflict, could only be dealt with by
addressing its root causes. His Government attached
particular importance to issues affecting children and
mothers, as demonstrated by domestic legislation that
stipulated the protection of child rights as set forth in
the Convention and the provision of maternal care.
38. In close cooperation with UNICEF, his
Government had successfully dealt with the impact of
ongoing armed conflict on children in western Sudan
by, inter alia, establishing specialized units within the
police and armed forces to prevent the recruitment of
child soldiers and working to raise awareness among
citizens and officials alike. In that context, his
delegation welcomed positive developments in
Sudanese-Chadian relations, and noted that the
Sudanese President had pardoned some 200 child
soldiers fighting in rebel movements, previously
arrested in connection with the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) attack on Omdurman.
39. At the recent high-level meeting on Sudan, his
Government had assured the international community
of its commitment to dialogue with rebel groups within
the framework of the Doha Forum on Democracy,
Development and Free Trade and to full
implementation of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. He reiterated his country’s commitment to
continued cooperation with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, who had recently visited Sudan.
40. Sudan’s efforts to implement the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, particularly in the areas of
education, health and protection, relied on both
Governmental and international support; in that
connection, his delegation called for an increase in
funding for the operations of UNICEF in Sudan and in
Africa more broadly.
41. Lastly, Sudan noted with concern the increase in
attacks on the dignity and rights of children living inA/C.3/65/SR.15
10-58163 6
occupied territories, also expressing alarm at the
crimes committed against children in regions afflicted
by armed conflict and hunger, often under the guise of
humanitarianism and charity, as in the case involving
refugee children from Darfur in eastern Chad. The
international community must see to it that such crimes
did not go unpunished.
42. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that the
current economic and financial crisis had had
devastating effects on children, who had been hit by
the increase of hunger, poverty, inequality and social
exclusion, as well as child labour, trafficking in organs,
child pornography and prostitution. The decline in the
mortality rate of children under five years of age, while
an important development, was no cause for
celebration, as the overall numbers remained
unacceptably high.
43. Fifty-two years after the establishment in Cuba of
a more just and equitable social system for all, her
country had an infant mortality rate of 4.8 per 1,000
live births, the lowest in Latin America and among the
lowest in the world. That dramatic decrease since the
pre-1959 era had been achieved by means of a public
and universal health-care system based on the idea of
putting the people’s needs before commercial and
economic interests. With regard to education, Cuba
guaranteed all children universal access to a
comprehensive education free of charge.
44. Such achievements were also the result of the
Cuban people’s extraordinary efforts in the face of the
adversity forced upon them by the criminal economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed by the
Government of the United States of America for over
half a century and rejected annually by the
international community in General Assembly
resolutions. Losses caused by the blockade in the
health sector and related restrictions targeting certain
medical institutions had hampered Cuban children’s
hospitals from acquiring proper materials, such as a
device manufactured in the United States of America to
correct a heart defect without open-heart surgery.
Cuban children therefore continued to be innocent
victims of the United States blockade against Cuba. As
long as policies in which international cooperation and
solidarity did not prevail continued to hold sway, the
world’s children and the future of humankind would
remain in danger.
45. Ms. Kursh (Israel) said that her country was
striving to achieve all the Millennium Development
Goals, including those related to the well-being of
children, having ratified the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its two Optional Protocols. Measures
taken in that area included the establishment of
community-based prenatal clinics with a view to
reducing maternal mortality and promoting improved
child health. The programme had been replicated in
various African countries including Ghana and
customized to meet the needs of the communities in
question.
46. Turning to education, she pointed out that its
quality depended on the quality of teachers. Israel had
issued a five-year reform plan to tackle the challenges
posed by teachers’ low salary and poor working
conditions. Part of the plan entailed bringing promising
individuals formerly employed in the technology sector
into teaching. Her Government was also sharing its
best practices with teachers worldwide through its
agency for international development cooperation,
MASHAV, which in turn collaborated with United
Nations entities on teacher-training initiatives and
other joint ventures.
47. Several extremely disturbing instances of
domestic violence involving children had recently
caught the attention of the Israeli public, underscoring
the need for better coordination between the Welfare
Ministry and other Governmental bodies in order to
flag situations requiring immediate intervention before
such tragedies occurred. Israel’s vibrant civil society
was particularly active in that area. In closing, she
emphasized the need to invest in the world’s children,
individuals who needed the nurturing, protection and
guidance of adults in order to create and enjoy a better
world.
48. Mr. Rakovskiy (Russian Federation) said that
much remained to be done before the world was truly
fit for children. The relevant ministries and agencies of
his Government were preparing the fourth periodic
report on implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child for submission to the Committee on
the Rights of the Child in March 2011. In October
2010, the Russian Federation had submitted its first
report on implementation of the Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict.
Accession by the Russian Federation to the second
Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography was under way.A/C.3/65/SR.15
7 10-58163
49. Most of the national social projects of the
Russian Federation addressed the quality of life and
health of children, creating conditions for realization of
their intellectual and creative potential and providing
support to children in difficulty, including the federal
programme “Children of Russia”, currently in its final
year.
50. A State commission that dealt with juvenile
affairs and protection of the rights of minors made
on-site visits to study various aspects of children’s
issues. A post of commissioner for the rights of the
child had been set up and had been operating
successfully for over a year. A support fund for
children in difficulty, established in 2008 by
Presidential decree, was designed to reduce social
adversities faced by children and to encourage
effective ways and means of working with families and
children in need of assistance. A national campaign had
been launched to raise awareness of child abuse.
President Medvedev had been the first to join the
initiative, followed by many well-known public
figures. A telephone hotline for children, teenagers and
their parents had been set up in September 2010. It was
expected that by the end of the year it would be
accessible nationwide.
51. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that the Convention
on the Rights of the Child had received more
ratifications than any other international human rights
instrument and had encouraged the development of
domestic legislation and protection systems in many
countries. However, as the Special Representative had
indicated in her report (A/65/262), violence against
children remained widespread, largely hidden and still
often condoned by society. Global adherence to the
Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography would be an
important first step in changing that situation. As a
staunch supporter of the two-year campaign for
universal ratification of the Protocols, Brazil strongly
encouraged all Member States that had not yet done so
to consider ratifying both instruments as well as the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. It also strongly
supported the Human Rights Council’s ongoing work
to develop a third Optional Protocol that would provide
a communications procedure for victims of violations.
52. The principles set out in the Convention on the
Rights of the Child had been enshrined in Brazil’s 1988
Constitution, even before the Convention came into
force in 1989. Brazil was also one of the first Member
States to adopt specific legislation on the rights of
children, the Statute of the Child and the Adolescent.
As part of its effort to enforce that law, it had launched
a programme in 2007 to reduce violence against
children and adolescents consisting of 40 policies and
actions aimed at promoting the rights of vulnerable
children at all levels of Government. It had also
recently passed a law increasing the penalties for
sexual crimes, crimes against sexual dignity and sexual
exploitation. Another law addressed the production,
sale and distribution of child pornography and the
acquisition of related material. A bill penalizing the use
of corporal punishment in schools had recently been
introduced as well.
53. Cooperation with neighbouring countries,
especially in the context of MERCOSUR, had proved
critical in addressing sexual violence and sexual
exploitation, which by nature tended to transcend
national boundaries. Brazil’s hosting of the World
Congress III against the Sexual Exploitation of
Children in 2008 was a reflection of its unfaltering
commitment to combating that problem.
54. Ms. Hoang Thi Thanh Nga (Viet Nam) said that
although progress had been made towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals, especially those
related to reducing child mortality, increasing school
enrolment and combating disease, it was of great
concern that 10,000 children under five years of age
died every day and that more than a million children
were left motherless every year. Primary school
enrolment rates were increasing too slowly to achieve
the goal of all children receiving a primary-school
education by 2015. Moreover, in many parts of the
world, children continued to fall victim to trafficking,
child labour and violence.
55. Safeguarding and promoting the rights of children
must be an integral part of development policies.
Poverty and other socio-economic issues must be
addressed to ensure the sustainability of programmes
that targeted children and must be better incorporated
into the policies and agendas of those United Nations
bodies promoting development. Key elements of the
newly launched Global Strategy for Women’s and
Children’s Health were to be commended and must
serve as a reference when designing measures to
improve the health of children. Furthermore, long-term
investment was required in order to build resilient
health-care systems and to that end, developed
countries must honour their commitments to provideA/C.3/65/SR.15
10-58163 8
long-term unconditional financial aid to developing
countries. United Nations bodies, specialized agencies
and treaty bodies concerned with children must more
closely coordinate their work so as to increase their
effectiveness and efficiency while avoiding duplication
of work.
56. Viet Nam had sharply increased investment in
health care and culture; more than 90 per cent of
children under the age of six now had access to free
health care and the mortality rate for children under
five had been halved from 58 per thousand in 1990 to
24.4 per thousand in 2009. Viet Nam was striving to
reduce infant mortality further to 14.8 per thousand by
2015. School enrolment rates had also increased
sharply in recent years and the quality of education in
schools had been improved. Gender equality policies
encouraged girls to attend school and assistance was
provided to encourage the enrolment of children of
ethnic minorities. Progress had, however, been uneven
across the country and school completion rates
remained lower in certain upland and rural provinces
than in urban areas. Viet Nam was therefore striving to
achieve further improvements in health care and
education. In that connection, international cooperation
played a key role and Viet Nam looked forward to
continued support and assistance from international
institutions and donor countries.
57. Ms. Abdolmaleki (Islamic Republic of Iran) said
that, on 21 September 2010, Iran had signed the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. Her country was already a party to the
Convention and its Optional Protocol on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography and
had also ratified ILO Convention No. 182 on the worst
forms of child labour.
58. Protection of the child was rooted in her
country’s religion and culture and enshrined in its laws.
In its legal system, children bore no criminal
responsibility. Its Constitution provided for free
education for all citizens through primary school, and
more than 90 per cent of Iranian children aged 6 to 10
had access to primary education. The Government had
begun to set up public preschools in both urban and
rural areas and was also providing interest-free loans to
the private sector for the establishment of private
preschools.
59. Her country had established an extensive primary
health-care network. As a result, child mortality rates
had fallen significantly, with infant and under-five
mortality currently approaching zero; immunization
coverage exceeded 90 per cent, and polio had almost
been eliminated. Programmes had also been initiated in
the areas of childcare, vaccination, combating certain
diseases prevalent in children, and preventing
childhood malnutrition.
60. Ms. Fulp (United States of America) said that the
United States of America was proud of its record of
promoting the welfare of children at the national and
global levels.
61. At the national level, an extensive network of
programmes protected children’s rights with regard to a
variety of issues such as child pornography,
commercial sexual exploitation, forced child labour,
access to health care, foster care and education.
Moreover, a 2009 Act provided resources to strengthen
existing programmes and extend health insurance
coverage to an estimated 11 million children, 4 million
of whom had previously been uninsured. Furthermore,
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act had
earmarked $5 billion for early-childhood programmes,
childcare and programmes for infants and preschool
children with disabilities to help them succeed in
school and beyond. The United States was committed
to providing equal education opportunities to all
children, regardless of their individual circumstances,
race, national origin, ethnicity, gender, or disability.
Students with disabilities, low-income students and
students of colour received assistance and the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act required
public schools to make available to all eligible children
with disabilities a free appropriate public education in
the least restrictive environment appropriate to their
individual needs.
62. The United States was committed to ensuring that
the protection of the rights of children was fully
integrated into its foreign policy and viewed UNICEF
as a key partner in its global efforts to protect children.
In 2009, the United States had been the largest donor to
UNICEF, providing it with $130 million in core
funding and an additional $170 million in non-core
funding. It fully supported UNICEF initiatives to
improve children’s health and education, protect them
from violence and exploitation and advocate on behalf
of their rights. The United States also commended
efforts by UNICEF to eradicate polio, achieve theA/C.3/65/SR.15
9 10-58163
Millennium Development Goals related to education
and to act on behalf of children in emergency
situations.
63. Ms. Shinohara (Japan) said that social inequity,
infectious diseases and the world financial and
economic crises had worsened the situation of children
in many parts of the world.
64. Education was a right that must be equally
enjoyed by all. It empowered people to achieve their
full potential and played a vital role in reducing
poverty and inequality, improving health and
promoting sustainable development and world peace.
Japan had announced a new economic cooperation
policy through which it would provide $3.5 billion in
education assistance over five years from 2011. In
addition, Japan was working to foster coordination
between schools, communities and governments to
provide a high-quality educational environment for at
least 7 million children.
65. Although some progress had been made in
reducing the number of child soldiers, the situation of
children in armed conflict remained critical and it was
hoped that more countries would become State parties
to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict.
66. As a sponsor of Security Council resolution 1882
(2009), Japan commended the fact that the Secretary-
General’s report on children and armed conflict had
referred to perpetrators of sexual violence as well as to
killing and maiming. The international community
must coordinate efforts to prosecute those who had
violated the rights of children. In that connection,
Japan was deeply concerned by attacks which targeted
educational facilities, teachers and students.
67. Further efforts were needed to reduce neonatal
and child mortality. To contribute to the achievement
of Millennium Development Goals related to health,
Japan was taking steps to improve preventative
services and clinical care for children and newborn
babies. In cooperation with other donors, Japan aimed
to save over 11 million children’s lives, including
nearly 3 million newborn babies. Japan also intended
to scale up effective interventions through the Global
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
68. Mr. Al-Mesallam (Qatar) said that Qatar attached
great importance to the rights of the child. Its efforts to
promote those rights stemmed from principles
enshrined in its Constitution, which, inter alia,
stipulated that the family was the basic unit of society,
protected young people from corruption and
exploitation and enshrined their right to attain their full
potential. The law, moreover, provided protection to
children, mothers and older persons, safeguarded
workers’ rights and outlawed the employment of
women and children in dangerous professions,
including the participation of children in camel races.
Furthermore, all internationally recognized violations
of children’s rights, including sexual exploitation,
prostitution, slavery and forced labour were punishable
under Qatari law. Qatar had also ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols.
69. Additionally, Qatar had established authorities
and institutions to safeguard children’s rights,
including the Supreme Council for Family Affairs,
which was striving, inter alia, to ensure that national
legislation and practices complied with human rights
instruments. It had also established shelters for women
and children who were victims of abuse and violence
and supported their reintegration into society. Publicity
campaigns and workshops raised awareness among all
sectors of society of the rights of children.
70. Qatar remained deeply concerned about the
violation of the rights of children living under foreign
occupation. In particular, the Israeli occupation
authorities continued to inflict violence on Palestinian
children and deny them access to education and health
care. Reports by the Secretary-General must address
the plight of those children and, as a matter of urgency,
a solution to their tragic situation must be found.
71. Ms. Anbar (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that
Libya remained fully committed to honouring its
obligations under the international instruments on
children’s rights to which it was a party. Under those
instruments, it was incumbent on Governments to
provide children with a quality education, protect them
from sexual abuse, exploitation and violence and
combat HIV/AIDS. In that regard, Libya had adopted
legislation to safeguard children’s rights, including
laws which outlawed child labour.
72. Libya had made great progress in improving child
health and had succeeded in immunizing over 95 per
cent of the country’s children. Polio and neonatal
tetanus had been eliminated. Outbreaks of measles andA/C.3/65/SR.15
10-58163 10
other infectious diseases were under control and
neonatal mortality had fallen to 17.6 per thousand live
births by 2007 and was still declining. The mortality
rate for children under five had fallen to 20.1 per
thousand.
73. Libya provided all children, regardless of their
gender, with free compulsory education at the primary
and intermediate levels and had enshrined the right of
all children to an education in its national legislation.
74. The international financial crisis had had a huge
negative impact on the economies of developing
countries, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa,
struggling to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals. Moreover, children in regions affected by
conflict were forcibly recruited by armed militias and
were victims of physical violence and sexual
exploitation. Children were also trafficked by
international criminal networks. Libya urged the
international community and donors to provide the
necessary assistance to children in developing
countries and thus ensure that they could look forward
to a future free from disease, hunger, poverty and
ignorance.
75. Libya was most concerned by the inhuman
situation of Palestinian children living under Israeli
occupation and the grave violations of their rights by
Israel. Over 10,000 Palestinians remained in Israeli
prisons where they were subjected to physical and
psychological violence. Subjected to an Israeli-
imposed blockade, the situation of Palestinians in Gaza
was particularly dire: deprived of clean drinking water,
food, medicine, clothing and shelter, people in Gaza
were denied their most fundamental rights including,
first and foremost, the rights to freedom and self-
determination.
76. Mr. Siddique (Pakistan) said that many children,
especially those living under foreign occupation, were
subjected to grave human rights violations. Investing in
children was to invest in a brighter future for the
world. Improving basic health and education, reducing
maternal and child mortality and fostering global
partnerships must remain shared priorities.
77. The unprecedented floods in Pakistan in 2010 had
affected 20 million people, a significant number of
whom were children. Pakistan, in collaboration with
international partners, was taking steps to meet the
needs of children in flood-stricken areas. However,
rehabilitation and reconstruction would be a long-term
task.
78. Pakistan laid great emphasis on fulfilling its
international human rights commitments, and was a
State party to several international conventions which
aimed to protect women and children. Moreover, the
National Commission for Children’s Welfare and
Development had been established to promote the
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, assess the impact of constitutional, legal and
administrative provisions on the welfare and
development of children and make relevant
recommendations. At the federal level, Pakistan had
established a child complaint cell to address the
grievances of children. A child protection management
information system had also been established in
collaboration with UNICEF. A child protection bill,
drafted in consultation with all stakeholders, including
civil society, would soon be submitted to Parliament
and a social protection scheme provided assistance to
children with disabilities. Furthermore, Pakistan had
comprehensively banned the trafficking of children.
79. As 2015 drew near, international cooperation
would be required in order to overcome the obstacles
to the attainment of the Millennium Development
Goals that lay ahead, including humanitarian crises,
growing income inequality and concerns about the
effects of migration and climate change.
80. Ms. Solórzano-Arrigada (Nicaragua) said that
her Government firmly supported the Convention and
its Optional Protocols and had modern legislation in
place to promote the rights of the child. The protection
of children’s rights was a shared responsibility between
the Government, families, communities and society.
Given that nearly half of the population of Nicaragua
was under the age of 18, children were a major priority
group in the Government’s national development plan,
which centred on the provision of free, comprehensive
and quality health and education services. Specifically,
in the area of education, programmes focused on the
goal of eradicating illiteracy and achieving universal
primary education, which was expected to be reached
by 2012. In the area of health, a steady decline in
infant and maternal mortality had been achieved
through improving access to basic health services. The
reduction of neonatal mortality was envisioned through
improving the quality of health care. Food security
programmes had reduced chronic infant malnutritionA/C.3/65/SR.15
11 10-58163
and provided food to nearly 1 million children in
schools.
81. An important structure existed to protect
children’s rights, including the Office of the Special
Prosecutor for Children and Adolescents, whose
recommendations had resulted in a ban on corporal
punishment in schools and the prohibition of
discrimination based on sexuality in all public health
units. The Government was also developing a system
to make accurate information from all institutions
involved in the social security system readily available
to citizens and decision-makers in order to facilitate
development and implementation of policies for the
protection of children’s rights. Legal recognition of
children had improved, with the proportion of children
missing from the civil registry decreasing from nearly
40 per cent in 2005 to 20 per cent in 2009. Finally, the
Ministry of Labour was implementing a comprehensive
plan in order to eliminate child labour and the
exploitation of adolescent workers.
82. Mr. Haetanurak (Thailand) said that his
Government attached great importance to the
promotion and protection of children’s rights,
evidenced by the ratification of the Convention and its
two Optional Protocols, with national legislation being
enacted accordingly. Education had been given
particular priority, and his delegation was pleased to
note that Thailand had achieved Millennium
Development Goal 2 of achieving universal primary
schooling and Goal 3 of eliminating gender disparity in
primary and secondary education. The Government
was turning its focus to ensuring free and universal
education for the first 15 years of schooling and
providing early childhood education. His delegation
was grateful for the recognition Thailand had received
in the Secretary-General’s report (A/65/226) for its
advancements in the area of education. National
legislation guaranteed children with disabilities the
right to education and the ability to choose the school
best suited to their capacities. Nearly 68 per cent of
persons with disabilities were able to access education,
from early intervention to college level, and that
percentage was increasing. Furthermore, a regulation
enacted the previous year guaranteed education from
the primary through the university level free of charge
to persons with disabilities, with related expenses
sponsored by the federal Government.
83. Promoting the rights of the child required legal
recognition of all children. An act passed in 2008
provided every child born in Thailand, including
displaced and stateless children, with the right to birth
registration, which entitled them to basic health
services and education. The Cabinet had also recently
adopted a landmark resolution to withdraw Thailand’s
reservation to Article 7 of the Convention. The
Government had established youth councils at the local
and national level to provide a forum for children’s
views, ensure their participation in decision-making
and offer them skills training. For the fourth
consecutive year, two youth delegates were also
representing Thailand at the General Assembly.
However, Government only played a small, albeit
important part in children’s development.
Communities, schools and families also needed to be
strengthened to create a society in which children
could thrive.
84. Archbishop Chullikatt (Observer for the Holy
See) said that the growing impunity with which
violence was committed against children in situations
of conflict was deplorable. Children and adolescents
had become more vulnerable in the face of new tactics
of war. They were, for example, being used as
combatants at an age when they should be learning to
love and respect their neighbours. That and many other
heinous activities pointed to the need for all parties
concerned to make concrete commitments to address
such grave violations. The Catholic Church had been a
constant partner of the United Nations in combating
the use of child soldiers and, through its various
structures operating in many conflict zones, was
actively engaged in taking care of victims of violence.
In 2009 the Holy See, along with the Community of
Sant’Egidio, Caritas Internationalis and other Catholic
humanitarian and education organizations, had hosted
an event with the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict to
highlight the work of the Catholic Church and
exchange best practices.
85. Numerous regional and international initiatives in
recent years had demonstrated how concerted
commitment to the well-being of children could bring
about positive results. The recommendations in the
reports of the Special Representative on violence
against children and the Special Rapporteur on the sale
of children, child prostitution and child pornography
(A/65/262 and A/65/221) had great potential to reduce
violence against children and young adolescents.
However, they must be implemented in the bestA/C.3/65/SR.15
10-58163 12
interests of the child and with full respect for the rights
and duties of parents. Governments had a
responsibility to promote and protect the family, which
was the basic unit of society and the place where
children developed their potential, became aware of
their dignity and prepared for the future.
86. Ms. Cho Hyung-hwa (Republic of Korea) said
that although the right to be heard was one of the main
principles of the Convention, it had not been
sufficiently considered in the Secretary-General’s
report (A/65/226). The international community had
been moving to provide a forum where children’s
opinions could be heard and could influence policy. In
that respect, her delegation greatly appreciated that the
reports of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Children and Armed Conflict and the
Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography had appropriately
recognized the importance of children’s participation
and had provided detailed methods for implementing
the right to be heard. For its part, her Government had
established several forums to ensure youth
participation.
87. Although the realization of Millennium
Development Goal 2 of achieving universal primary
education was within sight, producing meaningful
results for children involved more than reaching that
simple objective. Issues such as retention rates and the
quality of education must also be addressed. Inequality
among groups was widening, despite advancements in
development. Her Government therefore welcomed the
efforts of UNICEF to introduce equity-based
programming, which focused on the most vulnerable
groups of children, in order to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals.
88. Children who were affected by crime needed
protection, whether they were victims or criminals. The
juvenile justice policies of the Government of the
Republic of Korea prioritized prevention of crime and
reintegration of perpetrators over punishment. Such
policies included provision of alternative education for
juvenile criminals, mandatory education for their
guardians to promote nurturing environments and
court-appointed assistance in juvenile protection cases.
89. Ms. Smith (Norway) said that promoting the
rights of the child was an integral part of her
Government’s efforts to provide every person the
possibility of pursuing their full potential. Promoting
the rights of the child was the soundest investment a
country could make and must be part of any sound
macroeconomic policy; countries that defaulted on
their obligations under the Convention would pay the
price through diminished growth and prosperity. While
gains had been made in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals, they had not been equally
distributed between and within countries, leaving the
most vulnerable children behind. In a recent report,
UNICEF had presented evidence that taking an equity-
focused approach to improving children’s development
held a tremendous potential for positive outcomes and
was much more cost effective than spending equally
across all economic strata. Provision of more aid to the
poorest and most marginalized areas of society would
lead to greater results in terms of reducing child
mortality, among other goals. As the second-largest
donor to UNICEF, Norway welcomed the report and
called on other countries to increase their national
investment in social sectors, adopt redistributive
policies and accept nothing but good governance.
90. The Government of Norway had taken special
responsibility for Millennium Development Goals 4
and 5 on reducing child mortality and improving
maternal health. Progress towards those Goals had
been the slowest, and in that respect, her Government
affirmed its support for the development of the
Secretary-General’s Global Strategy for Women’s and
Children’s Health, which had the aim of saving the
lives of millions of young children and their mothers
by 2015. The Government had tripled its investment in
global health over the past decade and would be further
increasing it in the coming year as part of the
international aid budget, which made up more than
1 per cent of gross national income. Education for the
69 million school-aged children who were out of
school was another priority of Norwegian aid. Half of
those children were living through conflict and
emergency situations, and in that regard, she urged
Member States to contribute funding for their
education, in line with General Assembly resolution
64/290 on the right to education in emergency
situations.
91. With regard to the problem of violence against
children, at the global level, the girl child was
particularly vulnerable. Special attention was required
to eliminate traditional attitudes and practices that were
harmful to girls. There was also an urgent need to end
impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence againstA/C.3/65/SR.15
13 10-58163
children in all settings, including in situations of
conflict and crisis. The Government of Norway fully
supported the recommendation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on violence
against children that all States introduce an explicit
national legal ban on all forms of violence.
92. Mr. Zakaria (Malaysia) said that while every
State must make serious efforts to ensure the protection
of children from abuse and exploitation, large-scale
development issues such as poverty and conflict were
closely related to the violation of children’s rights.
Developing countries required appropriate assistance
and resources to address the underlying development
issues that undermined the promotion of children’s
rights.
93. The Government of Malaysia had been taking
steps to adhere to international treaties on children’s
rights. It had recently withdrawn its reservations to
Articles 1, 13 and 15 of the Convention, and an
inter-ministerial committee was analysing the possible
withdrawal of the remaining reservations to the
Convention and accession to the two Optional
Protocols. Furthermore, amendments were being
proposed to the Child Act of 2001 to bring it in line
with the core principles of the Convention. The
proposed changes included measures to improve
treatment of children charged with criminal offences,
including the repeal of corporal punishment; improve
the protection of children under temporary custody;
and increase the penalties for offences related to the
abuse or exploitation of children. Policies and
guidelines on child development, protection of children
and reproductive health education had also been
adapted or formulated and were currently being
implemented.
94. Malaysia had achieved Millennium Development
Goal 2 of universal primary education in 1990 and
gender parity in education had been achieved in 2005.
Women’s enrolment in tertiary institutions had greatly
increased, with women now making up 60 per cent of
students. Education was recognized as essential to
development and was consistently the largest budget
allocation, averaging a fifth of the total annual budget.
New approaches were also being formulated to meet
Goal 4 of reducing child mortality.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.