United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.35*
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
29 January 2013
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-58017* (E)
*1258017*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 35th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 8 November 2012, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
later: Ms. Alfeine (Vice-Chair) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Comoros)
Contents*
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly
on Ageing (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 66: Rights of indigenous peoples (continued)
(a) Rights of indigenous peoples (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
__________________
** Reissued for technical reasons on 13 June 2013.A/C.3/67/SR.35
12-58017 2
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the ef-
fective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 103: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the ef-
fective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/67/SR.35
3 12-58017
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social Development and of the
twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating
to the world social situation and to youth, ageing,
disabled persons and the family (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older
Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.11: Implementation of the
outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the
General Assembly
1. Mr. Chir (Algeria), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
expressed the concern that achievement of the goals set
at the World Summit for Social Development was
being hindered by the international financial and
economic crisis and other factors such as climate
change. The draft resolution underlined the importance
of maintaining and enhancing international support for
national capacity-building in the area of social
development. More efforts were needed to create an
enabling environment, in particular to solve the
external debt problem. The draft resolution took into
account the outcome of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development held in Rio de Janeiro
earlier in the year and the ministerial declaration
adopted at the high-level segment of the 2012
substantive session of the Economic and Social Council.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.12: Preparation for the
observance of the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family
2. Mr. Chir (Algeria), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said
that the twentieth anniversary of the International Year
of the Family provided a useful opportunity to draw
further attention to its objectives and strengthen
family-centred policies and programmes as part of an
integrated comprehensive approach to development.
Based on the previous resolution, the text took into
account the resolution on the subject adopted by the
Economic and Social Council.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.13: Follow-up to the
Second World Assembly on Ageing
3. Mr. Chir (Algeria), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said
that it acknowledged that urgent action was needed to
accelerate implementation of action plans on ageing. It
encouraged the international community, including
donors, to support national efforts to eradicate poverty,
while bearing in mind that States had primary
responsibility for their own economic and social
development. The text took note with appreciation of
the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing, invited
States and United Nations bodies to continue to
contribute to its work and requested the Secretary-
General to continue to provide it all the necessary
support to organize a working session in 2013.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.19: Intensification of
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women
4. Mr. Mynarends (Netherlands), introducing the
draft resolution, said that Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta,
Mexico, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden and Turkey had joined the sponsors.
5. Violence prevented women and girls worldwide
from participating fully in society. According to
estimates between 17 and 38 per cent of women around
the world suffered from violence, mostly at home, and
the numbers continued to grow. States must take action
to end such abuse and ensure safety and justice for
women and girls subjected to violence. The draft
resolution focused on the need to take action in the
legal, social and economic spheres to prevent and
eliminate violence against women and girls.
6. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Burkina Faso, Georgia, Guatemala,
Liberia, Mali, Mongolia, Peru, Senegal, Serbia,
Slovakia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia had joined the sponsors.A/C.3/67/SR.35
12-58017 4
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.23: Rights of the child
7. Mr. Rivas (Uruguay), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Croatia, Honduras and Monaco
had joined the sponsors.
8. Emphasis had been placed in the draft resolution on
the challenges to the full enjoyment of the rights of the
child, in the areas of discrimination, poverty, education,
health, nutrition, violence and sexual exploitation. The
text also considered the special needs of children living
in particularly difficult situations and affected by armed
conflict. Moreover, the draft resolution focused on the
rights of indigenous children and their special needs.
National policies were needed to protect them and enable
them to participate fully in society.
9. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Burkina Faso, Georgia,
Kyrgyzstan, Malawi, Mali, Mongolia, the Niger, the
Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia, Senegal and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had joined
the sponsors.
Agenda item 66: Rights of indigenous peoples
(continued)
(a) Rights of indigenous peoples (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.24: Rights of
indigenous peoples
10. Mr. Llorentty (Plurinational State of Bolivia),
introducing the draft resolution, said that the adoption
of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
had been a landmark in the history of the United
Nations and for the more than 370 million indigenous
people throughout the world. Another landmark would
be the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples to be
held in 2014. The draft resolution referred to a number
of resolutions adopted in that connection as well as the
proclamation by the General Assembly of 2013 as the
International Year of Quinoa. It requested the Secretary-
General to prepare by May 2014 a comprehensive last
report on the achievement of the goals and objectives
of the Second International Decade of the World’s
Indigenous Peoples and its impact on the Millennium
Development Goals, in preparation for the World
Conference.
11. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Norway and Peru had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to
self-determination (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.29: Universal realization of
the right of peoples to self-determination
12. Mr. Butt (Pakistan), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Libya, Madagascar, Maldives,
Mali and Uganda had joined the sponsors.
13. Without realization of the right of peoples to self-
determination, which was enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, no other human rights could be
enjoyed. The 1993 World Conference on Human Rights
held in Vienna and other international meetings had
affirmed the right to self-determination of all peoples
under colonial or other forms of alien domination or
foreign occupation. The text of the draft resolution was
similar to the consensus text adopted at the sixty-sixth
session, with a few technical changes.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.25: Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional
Protocol thereto
14. Ms. Leveaux (Sweden), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Ireland, Jordan, Malta, Panama,
Portugal, Romania and Serbia had joined the sponsors.
15. She welcomed the fact that the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities had enjoyed a very
high level of ratification in a short time and already had
126 States parties, Afghanistan being the newest. In
2011, thanks to the Third Committee’s resolution, the
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
had been granted an additional week of meeting time,
without which it would undoubtedly have become
obsolete. The draft resolution before the Committee
requested necessary additional meeting time for the
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.A/C.3/67/SR.35
5 12-58017
16. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire,
Georgia, Latvia, Liberia, Mali, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Namibia, Norway, Peru, the Republic of
Moldova, the Russian Federation, Slovakia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.26: Torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
17. Ms. Kofoed (Denmark), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the main sponsors, said that
Andorra, Armenia, Brazil, Georgia, Guatemala, Maldives,
Mongolia, New Zealand, the Republic of Moldova,
Slovakia, Turkey and Uruguay had joined the sponsors.
18. One of the fundamental principles of the United
Nations was the absolute prohibition of torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment. Nevertheless, torture continued to be used
in all regions of the world. The draft resolution
acknowledged the role of national and international
bodies in the fight against such practices. Cooperation
with States was crucial, especially in ensuring follow-
up to the recommendations and conclusions of the
relevant treaty bodies and mechanisms. The draft
resolution also underlined the importance of States
becoming parties to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
19. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Mali,
Panama, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Ukraine had
joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.27: The United Nations
human rights training and documentation centre for
South-West Asia and the Arab region
20. Mr. Al-Mesallam (Qatar), introducing the draft
resolution, said that the United Nations human rights
training and documentation centre for South-West Asia
and the Arab region carried out its work in line with
international human rights standards. Since its creation,
the Centre had conducted consultations on United
Nations human rights mechanisms, human trafficking,
media and human rights education. Owing to
developments in the Middle East and North Africa, the
Centre had taken on increased importance and was
receiving an increasing number of requests for training
and documentation. The host country had supported the
establishment of the Centre but additional resources
were required. The draft resolution requested the
Secretary-General to provide funds and human
resources to enable the Centre to respond effectively to
the growing needs.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.28: The role of the
Ombudsman, mediator and other national human
rights institutions in the promotion and protection of
human rights
21. Mr. El Mkhantar (Morocco), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Côte d’Ivoire, Guatemala,
Madagascar, Montenegro, New Zealand, Serbia, Slovakia,
Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates
and the United States of America had joined the sponsors.
22. The Secretary-General’s report (A/67/288) had
taken into account national and international measures
taken to implement General Assembly resolution 65/207.
The draft resolution encouraged Member States to
consider the creation or the strengthening of independent
and autonomous ombudsman, mediator and other
national human rights institutions in order to promote
and protect human rights and endow those bodies with
an adequate legislative framework and financial means
in order to ensure the efficient and independent exercise
of their mandate. It was the right of States to choose the
framework best suited to their particular national needs.
23. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Andorra, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, the Comoros, Georgia, Japan, Latvia, Mali,
Peru, the Republic of Moldova, Senegal and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 103: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.17/Rev.1: United Nations
African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders
24. Ms. Kaferro (Uganda), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of African States,A/C.3/67/SR.35
12-58017 6
said the United Nations African Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders
promoted cooperation among Governments, academics,
institutions and non-governmental organizations in the
field of criminal justice and crime prevention.
Amendments to the text of the draft resolution reflected
information contained in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/67/155). Paragraph 4, added in recognition of the
increasing shift in focus from punitive to correctional
measures, called for the use of alternative remedial
measures, using local traditions, counselling and other
emerging correctional rehabilitation measures,
consistent with obligations under international law.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of
human rights (A/67/387–S/2012/717 and A/67/390)
(continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (A/67/56, 159, 163, 178, 181, 226, 260
and Add.1, 261, 267, 268, 271, 275, 277, 278, 285-
289, A/67/292, 293, 296, 299, 302-305, 310, 357,
368, 380 and 396) (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (A/67/327, 333,
362, 369, 370, 379 and 383 and A/C.3/67/4)
(continued)
25. Mr. Mnisi (Swaziland) said that his country’s
Constitution protected and promoted human rights in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and other international instruments. In
September 2012, Swaziland had ratified the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and its Optional Protocol as well as the optional
protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography. Freedom of expression and opinion was
exercised through grass-roots consultations, one of
which had recently addressed issues of national
development. In his country, human rights must be
exercised in a moral framework rooted in human
dignity, not at the expense of the rights of others. For
example, freedom of expression was guaranteed,
provided no individual, culture or religion was
disrespected.
26. His delegation believed that greater importance
should be attached to the right to development, so that
everyone enjoyed the benefits of globalization. The
international community should pay more attention to
economic, social and cultural rights. Developed
countries should do more to honour their commitments
in terms of development assistance, technology
transfer, debt reduction and market access as genuine
development implied integral respect for human life
and dignity. His Government was committed to the full
respect of all universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated human rights, international law and all the
principles outlined in the Charter of the United
Nations.
27. Ms. Alfeine (Comoros), Vice-Chair, took the
Chair.
28. Mr. Wang Min (China) said that, despite positive
developments in international human rights, serious
discrimination continued to exist and certain religions
were being increasingly demonized. The international
community must refrain from interfering in countries’
internal affairs under the pretext of human rights,
showing disregard for the Charter of the United
Nations, and reject politicization and double standards.
Some countries put pressure on developing countries
with country-specific human rights issues while
turning a blind eye to violations at home. Echoing calls
from developing countries for the right to
development, he said that developed countries should
honour their official development assistance
commitments and increase financial and technical
support for developing countries, instead of criticizing
their human rights situations.
29. His delegation was concerned at the recent video
defaming Muslims that had provoked widespread
protests and opposed any action that offended the
religious sensitivities of Muslims. States must enforce
a zero-tolerance policy on racism and not acquiesce to
it under the pretext of freedom of expression.
30. In view of the continuing economic crisis, which
posed greater challenges for social development, his
delegation called for vulnerable groups to be protected
with a view to ensuring equality and dignity for all.
China supported the organization of a High-level
Meeting on Disability and Development in 2013 and
the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples in 2014.
31. The United Nations should effectively apply the
principle of equitable geographical distribution andA/C.3/67/SR.35
7 12-58017
increase the representation of developing countries in
United Nations human rights bodies. The Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights should enhance
its objectivity, equitability and transparency and accept
the supervision of the Human Rights Council. Special
procedures and human rights treaty bodies should
abide by the Code of Conduct and comply strictly with
their respective mandates. The core of human rights
system reform should be the intergovernmental
process, where Member States played the leading role.
32. For three decades the Chinese Government had
followed a human rights development path with
Chinese characteristics, bringing benefits to the
Chinese people and contributing to the international
human rights endeavour. China was ready to strengthen
dialogue and cooperation with other countries on the
basis of equality and mutual respect.
33. Mr. McLay (New Zealand) said that respect for
universal human rights was fundamental to his
country’s domestic and foreign policy. New Zealand
had supported the human rights treaty body system
since its inception and maintained a standing invitation
to all holders of United Nations special procedures
mandates.
34. As political change swept across much of North
Africa and the Middle East clear lessons had emerged
for Governments and citizens. Once unleashed the
demand for human rights and human dignity was
virtually unstoppable. The countries with the most
success in navigating those upheavals were those
whose Governments had met their citizens’ demands
through a meaningful and inclusive political process.
The international community must lend full support to
assist and enhance that process.
35. In 2011, his delegation had warned that
Governments that applied military solutions to political
and social crises risked pushing their countries to the
edge of disaster. That had been seen in the Syrian Arab
Republic, where the plight of ordinary citizens was
deteriorating and civil war had begun to destabilize the
region. Within the country it was inflicting wounds that
could take generations to heal. Immediate steps must
be taken to protect lives and, while his delegation
supported the ongoing efforts of the Joint Special
Representative for Syria, it believed that a broad-
based, inclusive political settlement was necessary,
including a meaningful transition of power.
36. Turning to the issue of women’s empowerment,
he said that no society could reach its full potential if it
denied basic rights and the opportunity for full
participation in all aspects of life to more than half its
population. Women and girls around the world faced
multiple barriers that prevented them from gaining an
education, owning property, entering the workforce or
holding political office. They experienced horrific
violence and abuse, in particular if they challenged
their situation. It was essential to tackle those issues
and the deeply ingrained attitudes underlying them.
37. Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova) said that the
issue of human rights was a work in progress but
human rights were better enjoyed in appropriate
conditions for development, decent work and well-
being. Social and political movements in many parts of
the world, including Eastern Europe and the Middle
East, had revealed the obvious link between the
protection of human rights and civic participation, on
the one hand, and political stability and economic
prosperity, on the other. A sound economy could be a
good premise for the universal enjoyment of human
rights while respect for democratic principles and the
rights to education, freedom of expression and non-
discrimination were incentives for true democratic
development.
38. The Republic of Moldova had undergone
turbulent times, suffering undemocratic practices in the
past, in particular with regard to the rule of law. Since
the rule of law and independence of the judiciary were
preconditions for guaranteeing public trust, order and
human rights, foreign direct investment and sustainable
economic development, as a priority his Government
had been strengthening the judiciary in line with
European standards. A State party to nearly all United
Nations human rights treaties and their optional
protocols, the Republic of Moldova had adopted
legislation on national minorities, labour migration,
human trafficking, domestic violence and gender
equality.
39. His Government was concerned about the
situation of human rights in the Transnistrian region,
where a separatist regime had long disrespected
people’s freedoms. The European Court of Human
Rights had confirmed human rights violations in the
administration of schools in the region, calling on the
international community to pay attention to breakaway
regions like Transnistria. Human rights were a priority
in his Government’s negotiations with the TransnistrianA/C.3/67/SR.35
12-58017 8
administration, the latest round of which had already
offered a favourable platform to address violations and
other humanitarian questions.
40. Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana) said that his country had
made progress in the realm of human rights through a
broad-based and inclusive consultative approach
involving citizens and all stakeholders. In particular, it
had made significant strides in the promotion and
protection of the rights of women and children. In
2008, the National Assembly had adopted the Domestic
Violence Act, aimed at eradicating violence against
women and children. The Children’s Act of 2009,
which incorporated fully the provisions of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the African
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, would
protect the rights of children and promote their
physical, emotional, intellectual and social
development and well-being. Much remained to be
done, but his Government was committed to doing all
it could to ensure the full enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
41. Botswana was preparing for its second cycle of
the universal periodic review in January 2013.
Although the mechanism had been successful it needed
to be further improved. His delegation wished to note
that some of the special procedure mandate holders had
interpreted their clear mandates according to a narrow
and sometimes personal agenda. The adoption of
General Assembly resolution 62/149 on a moratorium
on the use of the death penalty had been an
unacceptable attempt to impose certain norms and
values on others. Botswana was party to several human
rights instruments, none of which prohibited the death
penalty. Article 6 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights placed no obligation on
States to abolish it while imposing limitations on its
application. The death penalty was not imposed
arbitrarily in Botswana, but its people believed it to be
proportionate to the most serious of crimes and an
effective deterrent. In view of public opinion, the
Government of Botswana could not commit itself to a
moratorium on the death penalty or its abolition, but
would continue to monitor the views of its people.
42. Mr. Starčević (Serbia) said that, despite the
emergence of new situations, the international
community should not ignore longstanding violations
of fundamental human rights. Serbs and other non-
Albanians continued to face a difficult situation in the
Serbian Province of Kosovo and Metohija, over which
his Government had lost control in 1999. Statistics
showed, inter alia, that of the 250,000 Serbs and other
non-Albanians forced to leave the province in 1999,
only 22,982 had returned, and many of those who did
return home faced administrative obstacles to property
return and hostility from local populations. Of the 427
communities formerly inhabited by Serbs, 311 had
been ethnically cleansed. In his report to the General
Assembly, the Secretary-General had given details of
murders, looting and attacks on returnees, including
minors, and acts of vandalism and religious
intolerance.
43. The restitution of property in the province
remained one of the main unresolved issues. There had
been a high level of property destruction while
insufficiently transparent and efficient mechanisms for
restitution directly affected many returnees. There were
reports of destruction, damage, desecration and theft
concerning numerous Serbian churches, monasteries,
graveyards, icons and other ecclesiastic and liturgical
items, while the Serbian cultural identity was being
systematically denied and replaced.
44. His delegation was concerned that there had been
no results of the investigation in response to the
Council of Europe report entitled “Inhuman treatment
of people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo”. Submitted by the Rapporteur Mr. Dick Marty
in January 2011, it had contained serious allegations of
unprecedented crimes occurring during and after the
conflict in 1999.
45. The province had been under United Nations
interim administration since 1999 but its final status
had yet to be resolved. The unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo in 2008 had further
diminished the possibilities for any substantial
improvement of human rights. His Government
remained committed to resolving all outstanding issues
related to Kosovo in a spirit of compromise and wished
to continue dialogue between Belgrade and Priština
with a view to reaching lasting, sustainable and
mutually acceptable solutions in full respect for and
protection of the human rights of all inhabitants of
Kosovo and Metohija.
46. Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka) said that, following the
defeat of terrorism in his country, his Government had
taken far-reaching steps to consolidate the peace by
strengthening democratic institutions and processes,
while seeking reconciliation and promoting humanA/C.3/67/SR.35
9 12-58017
rights. One outcome of Sri Lanka’s cooperation with
the universal periodic review in 2008 had been the
formulation of a national plan of action for promoting
and protecting human rights in line with the 1993
Vienna Declaration and the Programme of Action,
which his country had begun implementing.
47. The promotion and protection of human rights
could not be accomplished without improving social,
economic and cultural rights. Sri Lanka’s post-conflict
challenges included supporting 300,000 internally
displaced persons and ensuring their resettlement while
restoring security, law and order and civil
administration. Sri Lanka had established the Lessons
Learned and Reconciliation Committee, based upon the
concept of restorative justice.
48. The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam had
assailed democracy in his country for nearly three
decades and the collective psyche had been scarred.
His Government had embarked on reconstruction and
reconciliation with a decisive electoral mandate. While
grappling with terrorism Sri Lanka had continued to
cooperate with the international community, including
the United Nations human rights mechanisms, and was
waiting for a confirmation of the dates of the visit by
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. His
delegation called for constructive, fair, non-selective
and objective assessments to be made of Sri Lanka’s
post-conflict situation based on the reality on the
ground.
49. Mr. Desta (Eritrea) said that his country had been
committed for two decades to healing the wounds of
war. Ensuring peace and security, accelerating the
development agenda and preserving its people’s dignity
were among Eritrea’s top priorities. His Government
was working to achieve them by reinvigorating
economic growth, creating income-earning
opportunities for the poor, enhancing access to
essential social services and putting in place an
enabling environment for human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
50. Eritrea had signed and ratified the main
international human rights instruments and had
incorporated their provisions into national law, inter
alia criminalizing female genital mutilation. In 2010,
the Ministry of Justice had designed a strategic
framework for an open, objective, effective and
accountable justice system. In recent years, the
Government had made significant progress in
guaranteeing the right to food, education and health,
while reducing maternal and infant mortality and
reliance on external food aid. The Constitution and
transitional codes guaranteed the inviolability of the
inherent dignity of all persons. The transitional penal
code made it a crime to subject persons to torture or
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Every citizen enjoyed legally protected freedom of
conscience and religion.
51. His delegation rejected any attempt to use human
rights instruments as tools to exert political pressure on
his country, as had been the case in July and September
2012, when Eritrea had been the target of sweeping
accusations based on outdated information at meetings
of the Human Rights Council. His delegation hoped the
Human Rights Council would not be compromised in
the way the Commission on Human Rights had been.
Eritrea took its obligations seriously and cooperated
with the Council, inter alia through the universal
periodic review. In 2009, several States had reviewed
the human rights situation in his country, which was
working to implement their recommendations. The
next review by the Human Rights Council was due in
2014. Eritrea would address its human rights
challenges on the basis of broad political participation,
a sense of freedom and respect for the rule of law.
52. Ms. Vadiati (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
countries claiming to be human rights champions were
manipulating human rights issues to serve their own
biased aims. For example, Canada denied the freedom
of expression by suppressing peaceful protests while
the situation of women and minorities was of concern.
Canada should meet all its obligations under
international human rights law. The United Kingdom
was aiding authoritarian regimes and equipping armed
terrorists in the Middle East and North Africa. Her
delegation was concerned at restrictions on the
freedom of expression in the United Kingdom, in
particular on the Internet and in the social media.
53. The European Union, where extremism remained
prevalent, had been unwilling to tackle human rights
abuses within its member States, including violations
against the Roma, in particular in the Czech Republic.
Excessive use of force had been perpetrated in the
repression of peaceful demonstrations in many
European States. She expressed concern at the
prosecution of the Occupy Wall Street movement in the
United States and at the breach of human rights
through detentions and restrictions on public speech inA/C.3/67/SR.35
12-58017 10
Australia. Restrictions on immigration and the freedom
of speech in Australia were tantamount to violations of
human rights. Her country continued to monitor the
human rights situation around the world.
54. Mr. Camilo Ruiz (Colombia) said his country
had been striving to frame a comprehensive policy to
promote and protect human rights and international
humanitarian law through a five-year national plan.
Colombia had been working on a national human rights
system, which included a human rights commission,
created inter alia to lay down guidelines on citizenship,
culture, education, civil and political rights,
international humanitarian law and armed conflict,
economic, social and environmental rights, justice and
equality, non-discrimination and respect for identity.
Working in conjunction with the human rights system,
a national mechanism had been established to offer
care and compensation for victims of human rights
abuses.
55. In December 2012, State bodies and civil society
would be taking part in a national conference on
human rights. Colombia had set up a national
guarantees board and designed a strategy for
strengthening dialogue with a view to reaching
agreements on the protection and investigation aspects
of protecting human rights. In 2011, Colombia had
created a national agency for protecting those at risk
from extreme violence, including judges, human rights
defenders, witnesses, trade unionists, displaced persons
and journalists. His country had taken measures to
implement a strategy preventing the use of children
and adolescents by illegal armed groups. A series of
measures had been taken to help the victims of
violence in the country, on the basis of reconciliation
and compensation. Despite the size of the challenges,
his Government had made progress in adopting
structural and legal measures to tackle them resolutely.
56. Mr. Oh (Singapore) said that while the ideal of
human rights had enjoyed universal support, views on
the issue remained highly diverse in a pluralistic world.
As the United Nations sought common ground on the
promotion and protection of human rights, it had to
respect the historical and cultural differences of its
Member States, while recognizing their aspirations and
development needs.
57. As a young city-State with a multiracial, multi-
faith and multilingual population, Singapore strongly
backed the rule of law as a means of ensuring stability,
equality and social justice. It believed in the need to
strike a balance between exercising rights and bearing
responsibilities, placing equal emphasis on the
protection of societal and individual rights.
58. No country or group had the right to impose its
position on the rest of the world, as that would only
further divide Member States and impede efforts to
find common ground. Specific national circumstances
and aspirations must be taken into account but should
not be used as an excuse to commit gross violations of
human rights. It would be regrettable if States paid lip
service to the Committee’s resolutions. He urged
Member States to be open to the views of others and
respect their unique circumstances in order to pursue
the common objective of furthering the international
consensus on human rights.
59. Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam) said that since
2011 there had been substantive discussions on
strengthening the treaty body system and endorsing the
human rights policy in all United Nations peace
operations and missions. Yet people worldwide were
even harder hit by the negative impact of the global
financial and economic crisis on the enjoyment of their
rights to decent work, development, health care,
education and basic social services. New difficulties
had arisen in the reduction of poverty, one of the
international community’s greatest challenges, leading
to discriminatory policies and practices. The recent
release of a video insulting Islam demonstrated how
the right to freedom of expression and press freedom
could be abused to incite religious and ethnic hatred or
cause public disorder. International human rights law
and national legislatures must strike a balance between
rights and duties.
60. Viet Nam considered people to be the driving
force of national development. The country’s poverty
rate had been reduced, policies had been passed to
grant universal access to education and improve health
care, and steps had been taken to encourage the
preservation of traditions and culture, in particular
those of ethnic minorities. Civil and political rights had
been strengthened, with increased powers for the
National Assembly, the exercise of religious freedoms
and improved access to the media, including the
Internet. The Vietnamese Government had given high
priority to legal, administrative and judiciary reform to
improve the protection of people’s rights. It had
established dialogue mechanisms for cooperation in the
protection and promotion of human rights withA/C.3/67/SR.35
11 12-58017
Australia, the United States and a number of European
countries. His delegation acknowledged that the
protection and promotion of human rights was a long
and continuous process, requiring not only government
efforts but also the participation of every citizen.
61. Ms. Adhikari (Nepal) said her country greatly
valued the promotion and protection of human rights
and had enacted legislation in order to protect the
rights of all sections of society. It had set up a National
Human Rights Commission to investigate alleged
violations and make recommendations for action
against the perpetrators. Nepal was strengthening all
national human rights institutions related to human
rights, including those related to indigenous peoples
and women.
62. The right to development was central to her
Government’s efforts. Her delegation called on the
international community to translate the commitments
in the Declaration on the Right to Development into
reality, focusing on the eradication of poverty and
hunger while ensuring inclusive and participatory
development for all peoples.
63. Nepal’s independent judiciary played an
important role in safeguarding rights and fundamental
freedoms under the constitution. The country’s
independent media and civil society organizations had
been raising awareness of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
64. The advancement of women was at the top of
Nepal’s agenda for socio-economic development. Her
country was party to the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and had
been implementing a national action plan. It had also
adopted legislation to protect the rights of the child, as
party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its two protocols. In an interconnected world, the
international community must protect the rights of all
migrant workers and members of their families. Her
delegation expressed concern at the increase in
incidents of xenophobia and intolerance around the
world, which undermined human rights.
65. Ms. Klein Solomon (International Organization
for Migration — IOM) said that in a globalized world
it was important to recognize that migrants’ rights were
human rights. With regard to the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, she said
that IOM agreed that migration must be part of the
response to climate change. Instead of being perceived
as a failure to adapt to a changing environment,
migration could be part of an important adaptation
strategy for addressing climate and environmental
change. Moreover, States had the obligation to protect
the human rights of all individuals under their
jurisdiction, regardless of their migratory status. The
protection of migrants’ human rights was essential for
good migration management but needed to be fully
integrated into national legislation and policy
frameworks. Government officials should be properly
trained in the protection of migrants’ human rights.
66. Turning to the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, she said that most
obligations under the Convention already existed and
were binding on most States, whether or not they had
ratified the Convention. She drew attention to the
particular vulnerabilities of migrant domestic workers,
many of whom were trapped in difficult situations and
struggled to seek redress in criminal justice systems
owing to their isolation and the lack of protection for
them under labour laws.
67. Lastly, she said that IOM welcomed the report of
the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
internally displaced persons. It was essential to address
the major trends outlined, including urbanization and
climate change, as they resulted in large-scale
displacement. Welcoming the increasing number of
States incorporating the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement in their national legislation, she said that
IOM was committed to working with those
Governments on their implementation efforts.
Statements made in exercise of the right of reply
68. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the
culture of human rights had been seriously infected
when European Union countries had begun exporting it
to developing countries while forgetting their own
dishonourable human rights record, in particular
towards the Roma and Muslim communities. Her
delegation had not heard any apologies for their
imperial history or of any compensation paid to the
peoples of Africa, Asia or Latin America. She drew
attention to the inhuman treatment of immigrants by
the Australian Government, which had detained
thousands of people in internment camps for several
years. Iraqi women and children had been left to the
sharks in the Java Sea, in full view of Australian crews.
She expressed surprise at Canada’s call for protectionA/C.3/67/SR.35
12-58017 12
of the freedom of religion when it had committed
crimes against indigenous peoples, inter alia forcing
over 150,000 indigenous children to attend Christian
schools. Finally, she called on New Zealand to respect
the inalienable right of the Maori people to their land.
69. Mr. Kilic (Turkey) said that the representative of
Greece had tried to convince the Committee that the
years between 1963 and 1974 had not existed. During
that period, Turkish Cypriots had lived under siege
conditions, with 180,000 persons confined to enclaves
covering only 3 per cent of the island. In 1963, Turkish
Cypriots had been ousted at gunpoint from the
Government and an ethnic cleansing plan had been put
into effect, depriving Turkish Cypriots of their
constitutional safeguards. Following a military coup in
1974 aimed at annexing Cyprus to Greece, Turkey had
intervened in accordance with its international
responsibilities as guarantor power. Despite voting in
2004 for the United Nations plan, Turkish Cypriots
continued to live in unacceptable isolation under
inhumane restrictions imposed by the so-called State.
Efforts to end those restrictions did not contravene any
United Nations resolutions. His delegation called for
the international community to make economic,
commercial and social contacts with the Turkish
Cypriots without delay.
70. Mr. Kariv (Israel) said that the Palestinian
representative had painted a one-sided picture of the
conflict. Hamas and Islamic Jihad had fired thousands
of rockets at Israeli civilians in gross violation of
human rights and international humanitarian law. The
Israeli security fence had been effective in preventing
Palestinian terrorists from entering Israeli cities.
Innocent civilians on both sides suffered but, just as
Palestinians had the right to freedom of movement in
Ramallah, Israeli children had the right to ride a bus in
Tel Aviv without the threat of being murdered by a
suicide bomber. Unlike many of its neighbours, Israel
had an open society where problems were addressed by
civil society, the media and one of the world’s most
impartial judicial systems. Insisting that the road to a
viable two-State solution ran through Jerusalem and
Ramallah not through New York, his delegation called
for negotiations without preconditions.
71. Mr. Makriyannis (Cyprus) said that he regretted
that the representative of Turkey had distorted
historical fact. The answers to the points he had raised
could be found in numerous United Nations
resolutions. The so-called isolation of Turkish Cypriots
was a myth. As full citizens of Cyprus, they enjoyed all
the rights, freedoms and privileges of Cypriot and
European Union citizens and used Cypriot passports to
move, study and settle freely, enjoying worldwide
diplomatic assistance. Turkish Cypriots were able to
participate in regional and international sporting and
cultural events and could work as civil servants. As a
unilateral confidence-building measure, Cyprus
allowed Turkish Cypriots to receive free medical care.
Turkish Cypriots had received millions of euros in
economic assistance from Cyprus and the European
Union. Meanwhile Turkish troops continued to occupy
a significant part of a sovereign country in flagrant
violation of United Nations values, denying Greek
Cypriots their basic human rights. Turkey should
implement all United Nations resolutions, recall its
troops from Cyprus and restore the human rights of all
Cypriots.
72. Mr. Kodama (Japan) said that the remarks by the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea on issues of the past were groundless. Japan had
caused considerable suffering to the peoples of many
countries but had issued an apology, upholding the
principle of resolving all matters peacefully. In the
2002 Pyongyang Declaration, Japan and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had agreed
that, once bilateral relations were normalized, both
sides would mutually waive all property claims arising
before 15 August 1945 and discuss them in
normalization talks.
73. All persons living in Japan, regardless of
nationality, must observe Japanese laws and any
accusations of oppression of Korean citizens were
unfounded. Japan’s Constitution guaranteed the
equality of all people under the law and Japan was
striving to create a society free of discrimination. His
country was committed to normalizing relations in line
with the Pyongyang Declaration and comprehensively
addressing all issues of contention. He strongly urged
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take
action accordingly.
74. Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that his delegation strongly rejected the
statement made by the representative of Canada as
groundless. Canada was pursuing the hostile policy of
the United States against his country. It also strongly
rejected remarks made by the representative of Japan,
which were intended to divert attention and evade his
country’s responsibility for past crimes. Japan’sA/C.3/67/SR.35
13 12-58017
expression of apology without compensation for the
victims could have no effect. His country was willing
to normalize relations with Japan provided it took
responsibility for its past and abandoned its hostile
policies towards his country.
75. Mr. Kodama (Japan) said that it was regrettable
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had
exercised the right of reply instead of responding to the
concerns of the international community. He again
urged the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
take action to address those concerns.
76. Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) refuted the misleading remarks of the
representative of Japan. Japan’s aim was to avoid its
responsibility for past crimes. He reminded the
Committee of the 1996 report of the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, which had
called on Japan to accept responsibility for its
violations of international law during the Second World
War, publicly apologize and pay compensation to
individual women victims of Japanese military sexual
slavery and raise awareness of the issues by amending
educational curricula. Japan must recognize its crimes
against humanity and take responsibility for them.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.