United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.29
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
31 December 2007
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-56730 (E)
*0756730*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 29th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 29 October 2007, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (continued)
Agenda item 62: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 66: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/62/SR.29
07-56730 2
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (continued)
(f) Celebration of the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.29
3 07-56730
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/62/183, A/62/207,
A/62/212, A/62/214, A/62/218, A/62/222,
A/62/225, A/62/227, A/62/254, A/62/255,
A/62/265, A/62/280, A/62/286, A/62/287-289,
A/62/293, A/62/298, A/62/304 and A/62/317;
A/C.3/62/3)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/62/213, A/62/223, A/62/263, A/62/264,
A/62/275, A/62/313, A/62/318, A/62/354 and
A/62/498; A/C.3/62/41)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (continued) (A/62/230)
1. Mr. Pascoe (Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs), introducing the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar (A/62/498), said that it was based on the
good offices mandate of Mr. Gambari, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Myanmar. The sudden
decision of the Government on 19 August 2007 to raise
fuel prices had triggered demonstrations which had at
first been peaceful. Reports indicated that the
Government had used lethal force to disperse the
protesters. The number of casualties suggested
excessive use of force and violence by the security
forces. Shocked, the Secretary-General had been
among the first to react and had called for restraint and
dialogue, a call that had been joined by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar.
2. The situation in Myanmar remained of serious
concern in the light of continuing reports of abuses by
security and non-uniformed personnel, particularly at
night during the curfew, in the form of raids on private
homes, beatings, arbitrary arrests, and disappearances.
Dispatched to the area on 26 September, the Special
Envoy, speaking on behalf of the Secretary-General,
had expressed the international community’s deep
concern in the strongest possible terms. The Human
Rights Council and the Security Council had officially
deplored those acts of repression, the former in a
resolution and the latter in a presidential statement, and
had called for a return to genuine dialogue among the
parties. The Government of Myanmar had since lifted
the curfew, released 2,677 persons arrested during the
demonstrations, appointed the Minister of Labour as
liaison officer to facilitate communication between the
authorities and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and announced
that it would welcome a further visit from the Special
Rapporteur and the Special Envoy. The latter had
conveyed messages between the senior leadership and
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who had since met the
Minister of Labour. The Secretary-General, like the
international community, believed that a return to the
status quo ante was no longer an option or sustainable
and had therefore requested the Special Envoy to return
to the region and to Myanmar in particular. Expressing
satisfaction at the support of leaders in the region and
the entire international community for the good offices
efforts of the United Nations, which were based on
guiding principles outlined in the report, he said that
those efforts now focused on three objectives: (a) to
follow up implementation of the immediate steps
recommended to the Government to de-escalate the
crisis; (b) to facilitate the implementation of the
recommendations made to the Government to pursue
an inclusive, participatory and transparent national
reconciliation process; and (c) to facilitate the
implementation of the recommendations made to the
Government to address the socio-economic and
humanitarian factors underlying the crisis.
Responsibility for the future of Myanmar rested with
the Government and people of Myanmar, and the world
was watching closely to see how that responsibility
would be exercised in the interest of all the people. The
Secretary-General would spare no effort to achieve
peace and prosperity in Myanmar, and the United
Nations counted on the continued support of the
international community for efforts towards national
reconciliation, the transition to democracy and full
respect for human rights. A renewed mandate from the
General Assembly for the Secretary-General’s good
offices would enhance the initiative under way; the
more united the international community, the better the
prospects for arriving at the shared goals of peace,
democracy and prosperity for Myanmar.
3. Mr. Swe (Myanmar) expressed surprise that the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs should
introduce to the Committee a report that deliberately
pointed a finger at Myanmar regarding its human rightsA/C.3/62/SR.29
07-56730 4
situation. The Committee’s deliberations must be
pragmatic and constructive, since cooperation, not
politicization, was the best means of promoting and
protecting human rights. He welcomed the firm
recognition that responsibility for the future of
Myanmar rested with its Government and its people.
The authorities had proceeded with the seven-step road
map to democracy. The curfew had been totally lifted;
some 2,700 demonstrators detained briefly during the
demonstrations had been released; a minister had been
appointed to liaise with Daw Aung Sun Suu Kyi, whom
he had met on 25 October; a 54-member committee
had been appointed to draw up a new Constitution; and
the Government had agreed to the visit of the two
United Nations emissaries. He drew attention to his
country’s cooperation with the International Labour
Office on the establishment of a mechanism to address
forced labour, to its fight against narcotic drugs and to
his Government’s greater openness to United Nations
actors, all of which had been acknowledged in the
report of the Secretary-General. In response to remarks
made earlier, he conceded that the events in Myanmar
had been tragic; but what had started out as a small
demonstration over the rise in fuel prices had been
taken over by activists and rabble-rousers. The security
forces had not intervened for a whole month, and then
only when peace and security had been threatened. The
international community could best assist Myanmar by
giving it encouragement and recognizing its efforts.
4. Mr. Martins (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that it would be submitting a
draft resolution on Myanmar and would like to know
what stage had been reached in the dialogue process,
what the results had been thus far, what was the main
purpose of the Special Envoy’s next mission and how
the Special Rapporteur, entrusted with the task of
assessing the human rights situation in Myanmar, and
the Special Envoy, performing a good offices mandate,
coordinated their work.
5. Mr. Faati (Gambia) said he had thought that the
Under-Secretary-General was going to introduce a
report on democratization, not a report focusing on
Myanmar. He would like to know what the Office of
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs was
doing, in terms of good offices, to promote democracy
in other parts of the world.
6. Mr. Ashiki (Japan) said that his country
supported the good offices efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy and regretted that the
Government of Myanmar had chosen to use force
against peaceful demonstrators, leading to casualties
that included the death of a Japanese citizen. However,
he noted with pleasure that Mr. Gambari and
Mr. Pinheiro had been invited to travel to Myanmar in
November. Mr. Gambari’s recent visit to Tokyo had
been quite productive. He hoped that Myanmar would
accept with sincerity the resolution adopted by
consensus by the Human Rights Council during its fifth
special session and the statement by the President of
the Security Council issued on 11 October 2007
(S/PRST/2007/37). Japan was more committed than
ever to cooperating with the United Nations and with
Myanmar to improve the human rights situation and to
facilitate democratization and national reconciliation.
His delegation would like to know how the Secretariat
assessed Myanmar’s response thus far to the good
offices efforts of the United Nations and what the
future priorities for those efforts were.
7. Mr. Rees (United States of America) was pleased
that, in the absence of the Special Envoy, the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs himself had
introduced the report, particularly given the compelling
nature of the subject.
8. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) recalled
that the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
had introduced the report of the Secretary-General on
democratization (A/62/293) on 21 October 2007 and
delegations had had the opportunity at that time to
engage in a question-and-answer session with the
Under-Secretary-General. The purpose of the Under-
Secretary-General’s appearance at the current meeting
was strictly to introduce the report on the human rights
situation in Myanmar and engage in a question-and-
answer session on it.
9. Mr. Faati (Gambia) pointed out that the Journal
indicated only that the Under-Secretary-General would
make an introductory statement. It did not specify that
it would be about Myanmar. He was understandably
surprised at the appearance of the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs before the Third
Committee. His coming to introduce a report on
Myanmar was beside the point. His delegation wished
to have a reply from the Under-Secretary-General
himself.
10. Mr. Pascoe (Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs) explained that Mr. Gambari was
currently in the Myanmar region. Out of respect for theA/C.3/62/SR.29
5 07-56730
Committee, it had been decided to proceed with the
introduction of the report, given the importance of the
topic and the need to adhere to the Committee’s
programme of work. Responding to the questions
raised by Committee members, he said that the process
under way in Myanmar was still in the early stages and
that the crackdown in the streets was still going on,
whence the need for the Special Envoy to be present in
the country in order to try to defuse the tensions and
re-establish the dialogue between the leadership and
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. It was not clear how long he
would be there or whom he would be talking to. His
objectives were to find out what the situation was on
the ground, to ensure that detained persons were being
released and to engage with as many stakeholders as
possible. With regard to the coordination between the
Special Envoy and the Special Rapporteur, he said that
each was working to carry out the mandate entrusted to
him. The issue of democratization, and particularly the
elections aspect of it, had been discussed at an earlier
meeting, and his Office was always available if anyone
had issues that they wished to discuss. Replying to the
question from the representative of Japan, he said that
the situation was encouraging in his view, given the
positive steps taken by the authorities of Myanmar. It
was to be hoped that there would be a real dialogue
among the various parties that would lead to prosperity,
democracy and respect for human rights in Myanmar.
11. Mr. Faati (Gambia) said that too much emphasis
had been placed on the objectives of Mr. Gambari and
not enough on those of the United Nations. He was not
convinced by the answers of the Under-Secretary-
General, who should conduct such briefings in the
appropriate forums, not in the Third Committee.
12. Mr. Swe (Myanmar) said that he would have
liked to see the Under-Secretary-General address all
the items on the agenda rather than focus his remarks
solely on Myanmar. He wished to point out several
fallacies, notably the assertion that there was a
continuing crackdown on the people in Myanmar. He
emphasized that the situation had returned to normal,
that the Government had lifted the curfew and that
people were going about their daily lives. All possible
pragmatic measures were being taken to put the
country back on the road to democracy and
development, which was the deepest wish of the people
of Myanmar.
13. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) wished
to clarify that the introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar (A/62/498) had been announced at both the
meetings held on Friday, 26 October 2007, and that the
report had been prepared under the overall authority of
the Department of Political Affairs, which explained
why its introduction by the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs had been appropriate. In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/316,
the Secretary-General had the latitude to have his
reports introduced in any of the Main Committees.
14. Mr. Pascoe (Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs) underscored the importance of the
issue.
Agenda item 62: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.7: Policies and
programmes involving youth: youth in the global
economy
15. Ms. Sow (Senegal), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.7 on behalf of the sponsors, noted that
more than 2 million youth in the world lived on less
than one dollar a day, and the vast majority of them
lived in developing countries. Close to 50 per cent of
new HIV/AIDS infections occurred among youth. The
youth of today would be the adults of tomorrow, and
they deserved more attention and more consideration
as they were increasingly vulnerable, did not receive a
quality education and suffered discrimination and
violence. The elimination of poverty required effective
and lasting solutions to the many problems of youth,
who should be involved in all decisions. The sponsors
of the draft resolution, convinced that it was essential
to take action to improve the living conditions of all
youth, hoped that the resolution would be adopted by
consensus, as in the past. She noted that the following
countries had become sponsors: Albania, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Estonia,
Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mali, Netherlands, Niger, Portugal,
Romania, Sierra Leone, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and Turkey.
16. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following countries had becomeA/C.3/62/SR.29
07-56730 6
sponsors of the draft resolution: Angola, Benin,
Botswana, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Eritrea,
Georgia, Guinea, Iraq, Italy, Lesotho, Malawi, Norway,
Panama, Peru, Poland, San Marino, Slovakia,
Swaziland, Uganda and United Republic of Tanzania.
17. Mr. Jokinen (Finland) said that Finland wished
to become a sponsor of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.9,
which had been adopted at the Committee’s
25th meeting on 25 October 2007.
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/63/L.19)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.19: Improvement of the
situation of women in rural areas
18. Mr. Sodnom (Mongolia) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.19 and announced that China,
Ghana, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had joined the
sponsors. Major conferences and summit meetings
organized by the United Nations regarded the
empowerment of women as an effective way to combat
poverty, hunger and disease. Globalization presented
persons living in rural areas with challenges. General
Assembly resolution 60/138 had invited all Member
States to encourage the remunerative non-agricultural
employment of rural women, to improve their working
conditions and to ensure their increased access to
productive resources. A combination of traditional
skills, such as handicrafts, and new skills, together
with the development of new sectors of activities, such
as tourism, widened rural women’s access to
employment opportunities and helped to alleviate
poverty. It was also necessary to facilitate rural
women’s access to information and communication
technologies in order to enable them to play a more
active role in socio-economic development and to
bridge the digital divide. Rural women made up more
than a quarter of the world population but, although
they produced more than half of the world’s food,
owned only 2 per cent of its land. In order to
emphasize the part played by rural women in the world
economy, a number of bodies had proposed that World
Rural Women’s Day should be celebrated every year on
15 October. He hoped that the draft resolution would
be adopted by consensus.
19. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Argentina, Benin, Cameroon, Congo,
the Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Guinea, Haiti,
Honduras, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Paraguay, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Sri Lanka and Uganda had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 66: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.23)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.23): The girl child
20. Ms. Kondolo (Zambia), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.23 on behalf of the 14 members
of the South African Development Community, said
that it was a biennial draft resolution and that
Cameroon, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Ghana, Panama,
Senegal, Switzerland and Uzbekistan had become
sponsors. The text had been updated, streamlined and
strengthened to take account of new developments. It
addressed most of the issues affecting the girl child,
and it highlighted the needs of the girl child in the
areas of education, health and development. The draft
text also stressed the need to protect the girl child
against all forms of exploitation, abuse, discrimination
and violence. It sought to heighten the international
community’s awareness of the girl child’s vulnerability
and called upon it to improve the situation of girl
children living in poverty and to promote their rights.
There were ongoing negotiations on the text, which,
she hoped, would be adopted by consensus.
21. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Andorra, Argentina, Benin, Brazil,
Cape Verde, Congo, Costa Rica, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Kenya, Mali, Mexico, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Nigeria and Paraguay had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/C.3/62/L.25-L.27)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.25: International
Covenants on Human Rights
22. Ms. Schlyter (Sweden) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.25 on behalf of the Nordic
countries and the sponsors. Having referred to the
contents of the second and third preambular paragraphs
of the text, she explained that the draft resolution wasA/C.3/62/SR.29
7 07-56730
biennial, the previous resolution on the subject having
been adopted in 2005. Since then, the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights had been celebrated. The number of States
parties to the two Covenants was steadily growing;
since 2005, six States had acceded to each of the
Covenants, bringing the number of States parties to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights to 157 and 160 respectively.
During the same period, one State had ratified the
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and two States had ratified
the Second Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the
abolition of the death penalty. The draft text was very
similar to that of the 2005 resolution. Its main focus
was on stressing how important it was that States
should accede to the Covenants and the two Optional
Protocols and apply their provisions. The text had been
streamlined, and a few paragraphs which were no
longer relevant had been deleted. Paragraphs 8, 9 and
21 had been updated. The treaty-monitoring bodies’
endeavours to improve the efficiency of their working
methods and to ensure that States fulfilled their
reporting obligations on time were mentioned in
paragraph 10. Fifty-two States were already sponsoring
the draft resolution, which, she hoped, would receive
the support of yet other delegations and would be
adopted by consensus.
23. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Angola, Benin, Cape Verde, the
Dominican Republic, Greece, Lithuania, Montenegro,
Nicaragua and Ukraine had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.26: Torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
24. Ms. Wandel (Denmark) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.26 on behalf of the sponsors,
which had been joined by Albania, Greece, Italy,
Panama, Paraguay, San Marino, Slovakia and Slovenia.
The final version would be circulated as soon as the
current negotiations were completed. After drawing
attention to the contents of the second preambular
paragraph and paragraph 1 of the text, she said that it
addressed a number of fundamental issues of crucial
importance for the prevention and elimination of all
acts of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, and it emphasized States’
obligations under international law, especially the
principle of non-refoulement. It highlighted the work
done by the Committee against Torture and the Special
Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, and it commended
non-governmental organizations on their persistent
efforts in combating torture. The draft resolution also
mentioned the entry into force of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the
establishment of the Subcommittee on Prevention of
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment and the adoption in
December 2006 of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance. She thanked delegations for their
constructive cooperation in drawing up the draft text,
and she drew attention to the fact that, although the
Member States of the Organization were united in their
firm condemnation of torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment, their
commitment was not always translated into positive
improvements on the ground. There were regular
reports of violations committed in secret which left the
victims with little hope of obtaining protection or
redress. She hoped that the draft resolution, which
constituted a further tool in the global fight against
such practices, would be supported by many
delegations.
25. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Armenia, Benin, Cape Verde, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Georgia, Lithuania,
Moldova, Nicaragua and Ukraine had joined the
sponsors.
Amendment (A/C.3/62/L.27) to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.26: Torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment
26. Ms. Kolontai (Belarus) introduced an
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.26 that was
aimed at drawing attention to the potential danger of
trying to define torture in more restrictive terms than
those used in the opening article of the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. She urged Member States to
support the amendment.A/C.3/62/SR.29
07-56730 8
(f) Celebration of the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(continued) (A/C.3/62/L.28)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.28: International Year of
Human Rights Learning
27. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.28 on behalf of the Group of
African States and Argentina. He explained that the
draft resolution was a procedural one, as the sponsors
considered that the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights should serve as
an occasion for the international community to
expedite measures to promote the effective realization
of all human rights. In order for everyone to be aware
of all their rights, the year commencing on
10 December 2008 would be proclaimed the
International Year of Human Rights Learning. The text
also stipulated that a meeting should be held at the
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly to review
activities of Member States in the context of the
International Year. He hoped that the draft resolution
would receive the support of all delegations.
28. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) asked
for confirmation of the date mentioned in paragraph 1
of the draft resolution.
29. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) confirmed that there
was a technical error in the text and that the date
should read “10 December 2008”. A correction would
be sent to the Committee secretariat.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/62/183, A/62/207,
A/62/212, A/62/214, A/62/218, A/62/222,
A/62/225, A/62/227, A/62/254, A/62/255,
A/62/265, A/62/280, A/62/286-289, A/62/293,
A/62/298, A/62/304 and A/62//317; A/C.3/62/3)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/62/213, A/62/223, A/62/263, A/62/264,
A/62/275, A/62/313, A/62/318, A/62/354 and
A/62/498; A/C.3/62/41)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (continued) (A/62/230)
30. Ms. Samar (Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Sudan) introduced her report
(A/62/354), specifying the dates of her visit and the
places she had visited and thanking the parties
concerned for their cooperation. The protection of
human rights in the Sudan continued to be an enormous
challenge, and many of the concerns highlighted in the
previous year’s report remained the same. Despite
some progress on the political front, human rights
violations continued throughout the country. She drew
attention to the conclusions set forth in paragraphs
81 to 86 of the report and reiterated the
recommendations in paragraph 87. In conclusion, she
said that it was the responsibility of all Member States
to help the people of the Sudan to achieve sustainable
peace. Peace would not be sustainable without
accountability, justice and respect for human rights.
31. Mr. Mohamad (Sudan), after thanking the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Sudan, reiterated that his Government had
cooperated throughout the four visits she had paid to
the Sudan since the beginning of her mandate, the last
visit having been in July 2007. His Government was
eager to honour its responsibilities and commitments
and, as noted in the report, complied with the human
rights instruments to which it had acceded. That
approach was in keeping with a culture, civilization
and religious heritage that put the dignity of mankind
and human rights in first place.
32. His delegation wished to make some observations
on the report of the Special Rapporteur. To begin with,
the Sudan had undertaken to harmonize the provisions
of the human rights instruments with its domestic
legislation and had implemented policies and plans to
translate them into reality. A dialogue was under way
among the competent parties to expedite the Sudan’s
ratification of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
33. As to the national framework and national
institutions and reform, the Sudan had begun to
harmonize its legislation and its Constitution with
international human rights norms. Thus, the Ministry
of Justice had initiated the necessary coordination for
the adoption in 2007 of a law on political parties,A/C.3/62/SR.29
9 07-56730
providing for the freedom to constitute parties, and the
adoption in 2007 of a law on the civil service,
guaranteeing women’s right to employment and equal
pay, as well as maternity leave. Other draft legislation
was being studied, including a law on the human rights
commission and an electoral law, concerning which
consultations were being held with all political parties
and movements.
34. An entire chapter of the draft law on the armed
forces, which had been approved by the Cabinet and
submitted to Parliament, dealt with the principles of
international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians. The draft text provided for
individuals to be held criminally liable in cases of
violations and for perpetrators to be tried before a court
of law. A draft law on the police had also been
approved by the Cabinet, and another draft law, on the
security forces, would soon be approved; both texts
should be enacted in the near future. The National
Constitutional Review Commission expected to hold
broad consultations on the new electoral law with
women’s representatives in all sectors and would like
to earmark 25 per cent of constituencies for women.
The 2007 law on political parties allowed political
parties to conduct activities, even if they were not
officially registered. It exempted historical parties from
registration, although not new parties. The draft law on
the human rights commission had been prepared in
conformity with the Paris Principles and stipulated that
the commission should have an independent budget.
The draft would be the subject of broad consultations
and would soon be submitted to Parliament.
35. The criminal law banned torturing the accused or
meting out severe treatment to obtain confessions by
force. In July 2007, the Director General of the Police
had issued orders on the treatment of detainees or
prisoners, prohibiting detentions except in prisons and
providing for notification of families. Emphasis had
been placed on the need to lift the immunity of
members of the police when the allegations against
them were justified and required them to be brought to
trial.
36. Since signing the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement on 9 January 2007, the Sudan had made
progress towards building peace, achieving
development, expanding political participation and
respecting fundamental rights and liberties, as well as
the distribution of power and wealth. The Sudan had
the necessary political will to implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and to fulfil all
obligations emanating therefrom.
37. The Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement, which
reflected the wishes of the population, was being
implemented in accordance with the provisions set
forth in the text, under the supervision of the Supreme
Council headed by the Vice-President and with the
participation of members of the Government. As far as
security arrangements were concerned, the Government
was taking steps to absorb the Eastern Front forces into
the army, police and security forces. The Eastern
Reconstruction Fund had earmarked US$ 600 million
for development projects in the three eastern provinces.
The Government of the Sudan was surprised at the
Special Rapporteur’s unwarranted criticism and
questioning of the Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement,
which enjoyed international and regional support and
had made it possible to restore security, stability and
peace to the entire region.
38. In the case of the populations in the vicinity of
the Merowe and Kajbar dam projects, which were both
of strategic importance, the Special Rapporteur had
referred to the suffering caused by their evacuation, but
she had not visited the Merowe area to establish that
finding or the new sites to which the population had
moved. Her report was therefore unrealistic and
contained inaccurate information that did not serve the
cause of human rights. The economic, environmental
and social aspects of the nearly completed Merowe
dam project had been studied by experts of world
renown. International and national agencies had helped
determine the amount of compensation to be granted,
in consultation with the local people, who had received
the payments in kind and in cash and had moved
voluntarily to the new site. The Government had not
brought any pressure to bear on the limited few who
had wanted to stay. The Merowe dam project had made
a great difference in the life of the inhabitants, who
now had housing, health and educational services and
access to water, as well as much more agricultural
land. The advantages also extended to the northern
provinces, which were able to irrigate their land and be
connected to the electric grid.
39. The information in the report concerning the
Kajbar dam project was inaccurate, as the project was
still being studied. For political reasons, some residents
had made illegal attempts to stand in its way, which
had driven the police to intervene. The local
inhabitants themselves were behind the Kajbar damA/C.3/62/SR.29
07-56730 10
project. However, the company which they had
established in the early 1990s had not secured the
necessary funding, prompting the Government to
intervene in the light of the future social and economic
advantages. The Merowe and Kajbar dams benefited
the residents of the region by providing them with
decent housing, health care, education and food.
40. His Government was cooperating closely with the
Group of Experts on Darfur responsible for monitoring
the implementation of earlier resolutions on the human
rights situation in Darfur, which would be submitting
its final report in December 2007. The Government
was updating it on its activities and had the necessary
political will to implement all the recommendations by
that date.
41. In the area of justice and equality, there was a
need to complete the investigation into the incidents
which had occurred in Bulbul, Gereida, Deribat and
Buram and to prosecute the perpetrators of serious
human rights violations, especially persons who had
committed acts of violence against women.
42. Resolved to facilitate humanitarian work in the
three administrative units of Darfur, on 28 March 2007
the Government and the United Nations on Facilitation
of Humanitarian Activities in Darfur had signed a Joint
Communiqué to protect relief operations from attacks
by armed rebel groups. The Government was
endeavouring to protect civilians and ensure justice and
stability, thereby enabling 272,696 internally displaced
persons to return voluntarily to their villages of origin.
43. The statement in the Special Rapporteur’s interim
report that justice was not completely out of reach in
Darfur and that State agents had been tried and
prosecuted for human rights abuses demonstrated the
Sudanese justice system’s independence and integrity.
With regard to the lack of cooperation with the
International Criminal Court, the Government’s
position was clear and would not change: the Court had
no jurisdiction over the Sudan given that the
Government had not ratified the Rome Statute. The
national judicial system was empowered to prosecute
offenders.
44. Recently, an affiliate of the French organization
l’Arche de Zoé, which had been working under the
name “Children Rescue”, had attempted to smuggle
more than 100 children from Darfur through Chad to
Western countries on the pretext that they were orphans
and should be adopted. The organization practised
human trafficking, which constituted a blatant violation
of international law, human rights, the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and the Hague Convention on
Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect of
Intercountry Adoption. His delegation condemned
those schemes, called on the international community
to do likewise and hoped that the French Government
would take the appropriate measures. The Sudanese
Government expressed its appreciation to Chad for its
assistance in thwarting the human trafficking attempt
and arresting the persons responsible.
45. The Special Rapporteur had made sweeping
generalizations about the situation. She had been
misled and was trying to extend her mandate by
referring to the situation in eastern Sudan. His
delegation therefore believed that it was necessary to
terminate her mandate to avoid any disruption of the
work being done by the Group of Experts over which
she was presiding, which was receiving the full
cooperation of the Sudanese Government. The Sudan
was committed to continuing its cooperation with the
relevant human rights machinery and expected similar
cooperation in return. It hoped that the appropriate
bodies would fulfil their obligations objectively and
impartially and achieve the goals set forth in the peace
agreements.
46. Mr. Queiros (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the European Union
continued to follow closely the situation in Darfur,
where gross and systematic human rights violations
persisted. It was looking forward to the deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur on the ground, where hostilities had intensified
in recent weeks. Human rights violations occurring
elsewhere in the Sudan, including repression of
demonstrations, arbitrary detentions, torture and
curtailment of freedom of the press, could not be
ignored. He would like to know whether the Special
Rapporteur had made any assessments of the
implementation of the recommendations put forward to
the Sudanese Government concerning those violations.
He would appreciate clarification on any measures to
end the ongoing violation of the rights of women, who
continued to be raped, and the culture of impunity,
which were matters of concern. The European Union
was particularly disturbed by the appointment of an
individual who had been indicted by the International
Criminal Court for war crimes to preside over a
national human rights committee. Concerning Darfur,A/C.3/62/SR.29
11 07-56730
where gross and systematic human rights violations
persisted, he asked the Special Rapporteur whether she
had any updated information on the status of
implementation by the Sudanese Government of the
recommendations identified by the Group of Experts.
47. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that he
shared the Special Rapporteur’s concerns and was
pleased to see reporting on the situation in eastern
Sudan, an area on which there was limited information.
The report would have benefited from more details on
the implementation of the Joint Communiqué between
the Government of Sudan and the United Nations on
Facilitation of Humanitarian Activities in Darfur. The
Sudan continued to impede humanitarian operations in
Darfur. He therefore asked the Special Rapporteur for
her views on how the Sudanese Government and the
United Nations could better implement the
Communiqué. He would also like more detail on the
status of implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. The United States Government was deeply
concerned about the escalating violence and continued
attacks on the civilian population, which had resulted
in massive displacement, hindered the delivery of
humanitarian services to Darfur and threatened the
peace process. It supported the Security Council’s
willingness to take robust action against any party
which undermined the Joint Communiqué and
reiterated its commitment to working with the Special
Rapporteur and the international community to resolve
the crisis.
48. Mr. Ke Yousheng (China) commended the
constructive efforts made by the Sudanese Government
to work closely with the Group of Experts and
implement its recommendations. Noting the recent
progress made in the peace negotiations on Darfur, his
Government hoped that they would produce positive
results. At the second international meeting on the
situation in Darfur, held in Tripoli, where all parties to
the conflict were called on to reach a peace agreement,
progress had also been made on the joint African
Union/United Nations road map. China welcomed the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1769 (2007),
which had authorized the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. The international
community should seize that opportunity and support
the efforts made within that framework by the African
Union, the United Nations and the Sudanese
Government to resolve the crisis in Darfur. Concerning
stability, security, political progress, humanitarian
assistance and social and economic development, the
Sudan must be helped to find a sustainable, gradual
and comprehensive solution to improve the living
conditions of the local communities and eliminate the
causes of the conflict.
49. Mr. Sergiwa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that
the report had shown that some progress had been
achieved during the reporting period. The Sudan had
ratified a number of international human rights
instruments and cooperated with the Special
Rapporteur. Recently, the Sudanese Government had
adopted a positive attitude, including through its
participation in the international meeting currently
taking place in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and
unilateral ceasefire declaration. He hoped that the
Special Rapporteur would continue to cooperate with
the Government of National Unity to improve the
situation throughout the country and ensure that
humanitarian assistance reached Darfur and other
areas.
50. Ms. Paquet (Canada) said that the conclusions of
the report justified the extension of the Special
Rapporteur’s mandate. She wondered what role
international partners should play given the
deteriorating situation in the Sudan. Noting with
particular concern the present culture of impunity in
the country, she would like to know what steps could
be taken by the international community to encourage
the Sudanese Government to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court.
51. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) welcomed
the tangible progress achieved through tireless and
commendable effort in the Sudan in the very short
period of time since the signing of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and the establishment of the
Government of National Unity. Rather than hurling
criticisms and accusations of human rights violations,
pressure should be exerted on the rebel groups to
encourage them to go to Libya and continue peace
negotiations. The cases of arrest and detention
mentioned by the Special Rapporteur were linked to a
concern to parry any threat to national sovereignty; the
media tended to exaggerate the facts and did not
faithfully report the realities on the ground. In any
case, a mechanism should be established that would
enable the Sudanese Government to be given the
assistance it needed to overcome its economic and
social difficulties.A/C.3/62/SR.29
07-56730 12
52. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) welcomed the
Sudanese Government’s efforts to establish peace and
security, as reflected in the positive results already
achieved. Her Government looked forward to the
outcome of the current negotiations and of the action of
the hybrid force recently set up. The Cuban delegation
wished to know what role could be played by the
international community and the United Nations
system in helping to settle the economic and social
difficulties and ensuring the general well-being of the
Sudanese population in order to promote the right to
development and eliminate poverty.
53. Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) said that dealings with all
the parties mentioned in the report should be far more
balanced. The commitments required from the
Government of National Unity, the leaders of the
Eastern Front, the Government of Southern Sudan and
the international community were not the same; they
should be reviewed and standardized. The only element
welcomed by the Special Rapporteur seemed to be
Security Council resolution 1769 (2007), adopted
following the failure of efforts to implement the
previous resolution, which had been hampered by the
Sudanese Government’s lack of agreement to the
deployment of a force. That failure was to be laid at the
door not of the Sudanese Government but of those who
had wanted to have the draft resolution adopted in the
Council without obtaining the Government’s
agreement. The peace treaty should be widened to
include all the rebel factions. It was already clear from
the meeting held in Tripoli on 28 October that some
factions did not want peace, and his delegation
welcomed the statement by the President of the
Security Council on 24 October (S/PRST/2007/41),
raising the possibility of sanctions against those
factions in the event of their failing to support a peace
treaty. Without such a treaty and without the support of
the opposing forces, the situation could only grow
worse. Because of that situation, economic, social and
cultural rights were advancing at an extremely slow
pace, as was noted in paragraph 86 of the report. The
Sudanese Government needed considerable assistance
to achieve its goals, otherwise the situation would
become more complicated.
54. Ms. Samar (Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Sudan) again thanked the
Sudanese Government for its cooperation. She was
attached to her mandate as Special Rapporteur not out
of personal interest but for the sake of the Sudan. The
question of human rights raised by the European Union
was not confined to the Sudan but was also a concern
in most of the developing countries, which did not see
it as a top priority. The National Congress Party and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement were
constantly being urged to respect the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and the national Constitution as well
as the Southern Sudan Constitution. To that end, the
international community must give substantial support
to the Government of National Unity and to the
Government of Southern Sudan so as to help them
overcome the difficulties before them. The Sudanese
Government had been requested to provide the Group
of Experts with information no later than 26 October
2007, in order to enable it to draw up its report, but had
announced that it would submit a report on
9 November. Although encouraging steps had been
taken by the Sudanese Government, the situation on
the ground had hardly changed. With regard to the
Joint Communiqué from the Sudanese Government and
the United Nations on the Facilitation of Humanitarian
Activities in Darfur, referred to by the United States
delegation, there had been some progress in the issuing
of visas and in respect of customs procedures;
however, travel by humanitarian agency personnel was
still restricted. She pointed out that the question of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement was addressed in her
report and stressed the importance of law reform in the
Sudan for improving the human rights situation. She
agreed with the representative of China that the
engagement of the international community would be
helpful in that regard, as for any country torn by
conflict, and assured the representative of Canada that
the human rights situation in the Sudan was a cause for
concern to each member of the international
community, which was duty-bound to come to the help
of all human beings, wherever they might be. She
again called on all the parties to cease hostilities and
lay down their arms, engage in dialogue and not
sacrifice the Sudanese people to their personal or
political ambitions. She joined the representative of
Egypt in acknowledging that all the parties had
violated human rights and noted that if the money used
to finance the conflict was invested in the country’s
development, the peace process would gain.
55. Mr. Mohamad (Sudan), while appreciating the
solidarity shown by Member States, reminded some,
including the United States of America, the European
Union countries and Canada, that they were ill-advised
to hurl accusations at other countries. Nobody wasA/C.3/62/SR.29
13 07-56730
unaware that the Sudan cooperated with mechanisms
for the defence of human rights, and all its efforts, in
particular its participation in the meeting held in
Lebanon and its adoption of the ceasefire declaration,
attested to its desire to achieve stability and peace. The
United States of America, the European Union and
Canada, whose political motives were known, should
condemn the lack of participation of some groups and
should also speak out against the child trafficking in
which a French non-governmental organization had
engaged. The Government and people of the Sudan
remained attached to the promotion of peace and
human rights throughout the country.
56. The Chairman announced that the Chairperson-
Rapporteur of the Working Group on the Right to
Development having been unable, for reasons of
health, to introduce his report in person, the Committee
had authorized a representative of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to read out his
statement.
57. Mr. Mbaidjol (Director of the New York Office
of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights), speaking on behalf of Mr. Sengupta,
Chairperson-Rapporteur of the Working Group on the
Right to Development, introduced the report on the
action of the Working Group and the measures taken
by the High-level Task Force and the Working Group
in the previous year (A/62/183). In 2006, the Working
Group had established a set of criteria for the periodic
evaluation of global development partnerships from the
perspective of the right to development and had
recommended that those criteria should be applied on a
pilot basis to three selected development partnerships,
namely, the African Peer Review Mechanism, the
Mutual Review of Development Effectiveness, set up
in the context of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development by the Economic Commission for Africa
and the Development Assistance Committee of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, and the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness. At its eighth session, held from
26 February to 2 March 2007, the Working Group had
recommended the addition of the Cotonou Partnership
Agreement between the European Union and African,
Caribbean and Pacific countries; it had also adopted a
workplan for the implementation of its conclusions and
recommendations in three phases. The Task Force had
been requested, in phase I, in 2007, to study more
deeply the initial three partnerships and to start
assessing the Cotonou Partnership Agreement; in
phase II, in 2008, to study additional partnerships and
analyse thematic issues of international cooperation
under Millennium Development Goal 8; and in phase
III, in 2009, to consolidate its findings, revise the list
of development criteria and make suggestions for
further work. That very promising and pragmatic
approach to development had been supported by the
Human Rights Council which, at its fourth session, in
April 2007, had decided that the criteria for the
periodic evaluation of partnerships would be applied,
by no later than 2009, to other components of
Millennium Development Goal 8.
58. The Task Force had been supported by the Office
of the High Commissioner in implementing the
recommendations set out in the workplan. During
phase I, it had been in constant dialogue with
partnership secretariats and had begun studying the
Cotonou Partnership Agreement. It had carried out
three missions, the first to deepen dialogue with the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, the second to meet partners to the
Cotonou Agreement, and the third to meet
representatives of the Economic Commission for
Africa. The Task Force would meet again in January
2008 to discuss phase II of the workplan and make
recommendations to the Working Group.
59. The pragmatic approach adopted had given clear
goals to action to advance the right to development and
had strengthened the principle of responsibility. A large
number of issues remained, which the evaluation
criteria would cover, in particular that of the
responsibilities of the various partners. It should be
decided in that connection whether the right to
development would be better served by binding
instruments or by other means, such as voluntary codes
of conduct. He noted, lastly, that the right to
development called not for a debate on principles or
logic but for the design and implementation of policies
through a process of consensus.
60. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) reaffirmed her
Government’s desire to contribute to the
mainstreaming of the right to development within the
United Nations system. It was essential that the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights should
continue its activities in accordance with the criteria
set by the Human Rights Council and those previously
formulated in the decisions of the Commission on
Human Rights. Cuba subscribed to all the criteriaA/C.3/62/SR.29
07-56730 14
established by the Working Group for the periodic
evaluation of global development partnerships and
welcomed the establishment of additional partnerships
under Millennium Development Goal 8. As current
Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, Cuba would
submit a draft resolution on the right to development;
negotiations thereon were expected to continue through
the week.
61. Ms. Sutikno (Indonesia) wished to know how the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
particularly the Working Group on the Right to
Development, could contribute to more rapid
enjoyment of that right.
62. The Chairman suggested that, in view of the
lateness of the hour, a written reply should be
communicated to Indonesia.
Statements made in exercise of the right of reply
63. Mr. Al-Shami (Yemen) expressed surprise that
the representative of Portugal, in his earlier statement
on behalf of the European Union (see A/C.3/62/SR.22),
had raised the question of the rights of human rights
defenders in Yemen. Not only were the allegations
unfounded, but in countries of the European Union
many human rights violations were committed against
religious minorities, particularly Muslims, and other
minorities from developing countries. Since the
reunification of Yemen in 1990, there had been major
changes, which made it possible to ensure the
promotion and protection of human rights. While the
question of Yemen was no longer on the Committee’s
agenda, his country was always willing to receive
Special Rapporteurs and human rights organizations,
which could in particular examine the prison situation
in the country on a fully transparent basis. Freedom of
expression and of thought was a cornerstone of the
political regime. There was not a single political
prisoner in the country, and only persons who had
committed criminal offences were still held in prison.
His delegation therefore regretted the thrust of
Portugal’s statement and called on representatives to
see to it that the information they presented was true.
64. Mr. Chernenko (Russian Federation) said that
his country had also been a target of unfounded
allegations by the representative of Portugal. A number
of Western countries, including members of the
European Union, had not been mentioned although
very serious human rights violations continued to be
committed in them. The representative of Portugal
could have referred to the cruel measures taken in the
name of the fight against terrorism, or the existence of
secret prisons in several countries of the European
Union. Discrimination against migrants, trafficking in
human beings and the violation of the rights of ethnic
minorities were just some of the violations committed
in those countries, not to mention the resurgence of
Nazism, xenophobia, racism or the insulting of
religions. The approach taken by the European Union,
which should concern itself first and foremost with the
situation in its member States, undermined any trust in
the universality of democratic values and standards
established for all countries.
65. Mr. Desta (Eritrea) recalled that his country was
a party to most international human rights conventions
and that their provisions had been incorporated into its
national legislation, including a recent prohibition of
the practice of female genital mutilation. Emerging
from a war, and itself a victim of flagrant violations for
decades, Eritrea knew the importance of respect for
fundamental freedoms and human rights. His
Government sought to ensure full compliance with the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights in particular, and all Eritreans
enjoyed religious freedom. Small extremist groups
financed by secret foreign funds, which had been
proliferating in the past seven or eight years, invoked
their religious convictions as a reason for refusing to
comply with the national service obligation. However,
a national law made national service compulsory for all
citizens without discrimination and allowed no
exception on religious grounds.
66. Mr. Fieschi (France) said he wished to fill in
delegates on the position of the French Government in
the Arche de Zoé case. Upon being informed, the
Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs, through its
spokesperson, had denounced the way in which the
operation had been organized. The President of the
French Republic, who had since talked with his
Chadian counterpart, President Idriss Deby, had on that
occasion condemned the operation, which he had
called “illegal and unacceptable”. The Minister for
Foreign and European Affairs, Mr. Kouchner, had
immediately mobilized the French Embassy in
N’Djamena and had decided to set up a crisis unit
within the Ministry. Representatives of the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the HighA/C.3/62/SR.29
15 07-56730
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Committee of the Red Cross had been contacted on the
spot in Chad to check on the welfare and health of the
children, and a team from the Ministry, including a
doctor, had been dispatched to the country. As for the
French citizens responsible for the operation, who had
been arrested in Chad, the French Ambassador to Chad,
Mr. Bruno Foucher, had stated that they would be held
accountable in Chad for their acts. The Paris
Prosecutor’s Office, for its part, had decided to open an
investigation in order to ascertain whether there was
any need for further legal action within French
territory.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.