United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.36
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
31 December 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-58729 (E)
*1258729*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 36th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 13 November 2012, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/67/SR.36
12-58729 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.21)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.21: Intensifying global
efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilation
1. Ms. Beremwoudougou (Burkina Faso),
introducing the draft resolution on behalf of the African
Group, said that there were more than 100 million
victims of female genital mutilation worldwide. Each
year, an additional 3 million women and girls were at
risk of undergoing the practice.
2. Over the years, the Commission on the Status of
Women had worked to galvanize efforts against female
genital mutilation, which was carried out in a number
of regions, notably in Africa, and had even been
exported, through immigration, to areas where it had
been previously unknown. In 2011, the Heads of State
and Government of the African Union had decided to
submit to the General Assembly a resolution on the
worldwide elimination of female genital mutilation.
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.31)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.31: Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
3. Ms. Klemetsdal (Norway), introducing the draft
resolution, said that it contained new language on birth
registration, rescue at sea and arbitrary detention.
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Kenya, Portugal, Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland had joined the
sponsors.
4. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Eritrea, Kyrgyzstan,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Peru, the Russian Federation and Uruguay had also
joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of
human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.45)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.45: Committee
against Torture
5. Ms. Kofoed (Denmark), introducing the draft
resolution, said that it authorized the Committee
against Torture to continue to meet for an additional
week per session as a temporary measure. A
substantially increased workload was expected, owing
to the fact that many States had accepted the new
optional reporting procedure. Additional meeting time
in 2011 and 2012 had allowed the Committee to reduce
its backlog from 30 reports to 20 and from
135 communications to 115. To allow the Committee to
consider additional reports every session and prevent it
from falling severely behind as it had two years earlier,
it was absolutely necessary for the Committee to
continue meeting for an additional week per session for
the coming two years.
6. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Chile, France, Guatemala, Madagascar,
Mali and Montenegro had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination
(continued) (A/C.3/67/L.29)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.29: Universal realization of
the right of peoples to self-determination
7. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
8. Mr. Butt (Pakistan), speaking as the main
sponsor, said that the right to self-determination
enjoyed primacy in international law. It was affirmed
and upheld by all major international summits,
declarations and resolutions and by the two
International Covenants. Adoption of the draft
resolution by acclamation would send a strong message
regarding the international community’s opposition to
all acts of foreign aggression and occupation.
9. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Antigua and Barbuda, Jamaica and Viet Nam had
joined the sponsors.A/C.3/67/SR.36
3 12-58729
10. Mr. Carlton (United States of America) said that
while his country considered the right of self-
determination to be important and had joined the
consensus, the draft resolution contained many
misstatements of international law and was
inconsistent with current State practice.
11. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.29 was adopted.
12. Mr. García-Larrache (Spain) said that while his
country fully supported the right to self-determination,
there were situations in which the administering Power
and the authorities of the territory it had colonized
established a political relationship in their own interest
and insisted that there was no colonial link, while still
claiming a so-called right to self-determination. That
was a distortion of the Charter of the United Nations
and of the relevant resolutions.
13. The original population of Gibraltar had had to
leave the territory, and the current inhabitants had been
installed by the occupying Power for military purposes.
Claims to self-determination were therefore untenable.
The United Nations considered that the colonial
situation of Gibraltar affected the territorial integrity of
Spain, and thus had repeatedly called for dialogue on
the issue. Spain believed that a solution that respected
the rights of Gibraltar’s inhabitants could be found, and
hoped that the United Kingdom would join it in
seeking such a solution.
14. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that his
delegation fully supported the right to self-
determination, which, according to the relevant
General Assembly and Special Committee resolutions,
was applicable only to peoples subjected to alien
subjugation, domination and exploitation. Those
resolutions expressly recognized that the special and
particular case of the Malvinas Islands involved a
sovereignty dispute between two parties, Argentina and
the United Kingdom, and called on them to resume
bilateral negotiations in order to find a just, peaceful
and lasting solution that took the interests of the
Islands’ population into account.
15. The United Kingdom illegitimately occupied the
Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas.
It had expelled the Argentine population, which it had
replaced with its own subjects. The right to self-
determination was therefore not applicable. The other
guiding principle of decolonization, namely territorial
integrity, was applicable to those Islands.
16. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that the thrust of the draft
resolution remained too narrow. The text contained a
number of inaccuracies under international law. The
right to self-determination as stated in the International
Covenants attached only to peoples, not to nations. It
was incorrect to suggest that self-determination was a
precondition for the enjoyment of other human rights.
17. The right of return should have been reflected in
accordance with article 13, paragraph 2, of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
18. Ms. Kyrianides (United Kingdom), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, said that Gibraltar had
been included in the United Nations list of Non-Self-
Governing Territories since 1946 and enjoyed
individual and collective rights accorded by the Charter
of the United Nations. The right of Gibraltar to self-
determination was not constrained by the Treaty of
Utrecht except insofar as article X gave Spain the right
of refusal should the United Kingdom ever renounce
sovereignty. While the Government of Gibraltar did not
share the view that such a constraint existed, it was the
position of the Government of the United Kingdom
that independence was an option only with Spanish
consent. The referendum organized by the Government
of Gibraltar with the unanimous approval of the
Gibraltar Assembly, now the Gibraltar Parliament,
constituted a democratic, lawful and entirely proper
act.
19. The United Kingdom had no doubt about its
sovereignty over the Falkland Islands and the South
Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas. The principle of self-
determination, as established in Article 1, paragraph 2,
of the Charter of the United Nations and article 1 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
underlay the United Kingdom’s position on the issue.
There could be no negotiations unless and until the
islanders themselves so wished.
20. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, drew attention to the
statements made by the President of Argentina before
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee on
14 June 2012 and before the General Assembly on
25 September 2012. The Malvinas Islands, South
Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas were part of Argentine
territory and were illegally occupied by the UnitedA/C.3/67/SR.36
12-58729 4
Kingdom. The illegal occupation had prompted the
General Assembly to adopt a series of resolutions
recognizing the existence of the sovereignty dispute.
21. Argentina restated its legitimate right to
sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia
Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas. They were an integral part
of its national territory.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.