United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.45
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
30 January 2013
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-60851 (E)
*1260851*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 45th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 27 November 2012, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/67/SR.45
12-60851 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.50-L.52*)
1. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, said that the members
of the Movement continued to strongly oppose the
selectivity, double standards and politicization
reflected in country-specific draft resolutions. Such
resolutions, which tended to target developing States,
exploited human rights for political purposes and
breached the principles of universality and objectivity
in addressing human rights issues.
2. The Human Rights Council had an important role
to play as the United Nations organ responsible for the
consideration of human rights situations in all
countries within the framework of the universal
periodic review. The universal periodic review must be
an action-oriented, cooperative mechanism based on
objective and reliable information; moreover, it must
involve an interactive dialogue with the countries
under review, to be conducted in a transparent, non-
selective, non-confrontational and non-politicized
manner.
3. The draft resolutions submitted under the current
item targeted members of the Non-Aligned Movement
on the basis of purely political motivations; as such,
they served only to increase the politicization of human
rights issues and negatively affected the credibility of
the Human Rights Council as the competent body to
assess the human rights situations in all countries,
independently of their level of development and
political positions. She therefore urged all delegations
not to adopt any of the country-specific draft
resolutions.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.50: Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
4. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
5. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus) said that Chile and
Nauru had joined the sponsors. Despite annual General
Assembly resolutions on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea since
2005, grave, widespread and systematic violations of
human rights still prevailed, as underscored by several
United Nations reports. No substantive changes had yet
come about on the ground and there were serious
concerns regarding reports of torture. Regrettably, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had as yet
refused to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur. It
was important to speak out on behalf of the victims by
adopting the draft resolution; failure to do so would
send the political signal that the situation had
improved, which was not the case.
6. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Turkey was not a sponsor of the draft resolution.
7. Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that no human rights violations of the sort
described in the draft resolution had occurred in his
country. It was political propaganda by the United
States of America and its followers, aimed at stoking
confrontation and undermining his country’s goals.
Seeking to intervene in the internal affairs of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and impose
another system of government on its people constituted
an act of State political terrorism.
8. Previous draft resolutions targeting his country
had also consisted of lies. The United States continued
to use aid to bring pressure to bear on small developing
countries; there was thus a total lack of justice or
impartiality in the adoption of such draft resolutions.
Similarly, the Governments of the European Union and
Japan merely bowed to the political positions of the
United States. The draft resolution adopted at the
previous session had blocked all cooperation between
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and other
countries. His country unequivocally rejected the draft
resolution — a position which would not change in the
future.
9. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) said that her country
believed that differences in the human rights arena
should be addressed through dialogue and cooperation.
Intervening in other countries’ internal affairs ran
counter to the Charter of the United Nations and would
only impede international cooperation in the area of
human rights. In recent years, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea had made unremitting efforts to
improve the livelihood of its people. The international
community should adopt an objective, pragmatic
approach and provide humanitarian assistance to helpA/C.3/67/SR.45
3 12-60851
the country with the economic and social development
challenges it faced.
10. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that her
Government maintained a traditional position against
country-specific resolutions which sought to
selectively accuse countries of the South on the basis
of clear political motivations without any relationship
to the real defence of human rights. Such harmful
practices had been responsible for discrediting the
former Commission on Human Rights and had led to
its disappearance. The Human Rights Council with its
universal periodic review mechanism was the proper
forum for the examination of human rights. Her
delegation’s opposition to the draft resolution did not,
however, imply a value judgment on the unresolved
questions referred to in paragraph 2, which required a
just solution involving all concerned parties. Only
genuine international cooperation based on the
principles of impartiality, objectivity and non-
selectivity could ensure the promotion and effective
protection of human rights.
11. Mr. Nishida (Japan) said his country believed
that concerns regarding the promotion and protection
of human rights should generally be addressed through
dialogue and cooperation. However, there were grave
concerns with regard to the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea which
should be addressed through the adoption of draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.50.
12. The universal periodic review was a valuable
opportunity for all countries to review their respective
human rights situations and to accept the Council’s
recommendations. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea had joined the process in December 2009 but
had not yet accepted any of the 167 recommendations
that had been made. It had likewise refused to engage
in any dialogue and constructive cooperation with
regard to the special procedures mandated by the
Human Rights Council. The abduction issue remained
outstanding, with 12 of the 17 Japanese nationals
identified by his Government as having been abducted
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea not yet
returned. He urged all delegations to adopt the draft
resolution and hoped that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would accept its recommendations.
13. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
said that his country had repeatedly opposed the
ongoing practice of selective and unilateral country-
specific draft resolutions being submitted to United
Nations human rights bodies for consideration. Such
working methods had not provided for resolution of
human rights concerns in past years.
14. While the international community could be
called on to render technical assistance in the area of
human rights, the primary responsibility for promoting
and protecting those rights lay with States themselves.
The establishment of the Human Rights Council and
the successful functioning of the universal periodic
review provided new opportunities for a constructive
and mutually respectful dialogue in the area of human
rights. The consideration of human rights situations in
individual countries should therefore take place within
the framework of the Council’s review process. That
position was applicable to all country-specific draft
resolutions considered by the Committee at the current
session.
15. Ms. Smaila (Nigeria) said that the international
community should engage in a constructive dialogue
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the
basis of mutual sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Selectivity had no place in the consideration of human
rights issues, especially where country-specific
situations were concerned. Her delegation expressed
appreciation for the efforts of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to cooperate with United Nations
agencies. Abduction-related issues were best resolved
at the bilateral level. In that connection, she called on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, on
humanitarian, not political, grounds, to provide
information to families with missing relatives and to
cooperate fully with the Human Rights Council.
Countries within the same region should further
develop their cooperation with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in the interest of good
neighbourliness.
16. Ms. Solórzano-Arriagada (Nicaragua) said that
her delegation continued to reject, on principle, the
submission of country-specific draft resolutions on
human rights. The Human Rights Council was the
appropriate body to address such issues, specifically
through the universal periodic review mechanism, in
which all countries were examined on an equal footing.
17. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) said that his
delegation regretted that some States insisted on
introducing draft resolutions dealing with the human
rights situations in specific countries for politicalA/C.3/67/SR.45
12-60851 4
reasons. The practice threatened the credibility of
political and legal reference points in the framework of
international relations and undermined international
consensus on the machinery dealing with human rights.
18. His delegation wished to reaffirm its opposition
in principle to such initiatives based on the Syrian Arab
Republic’s refusal to invoke human rights issues
selectively in order to interfere in the internal affairs of
Member States on humanitarian and legal pretexts.
Doing so contradicted the Charter of the United
Nations, which affirmed the principle of the sovereign
equality of all Member States. Good neighbourliness
and the peaceful settlement of disputes were not
advanced through the adoption of country-specific
resolutions. Human rights issues should be dealt with
in the appropriate forum, namely the Human Rights
Council, which reviewed questions of human rights in
all Member States and not in specific States.
19. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her delegation
opposed the politically motivated submission of
country-specific resolutions on human rights issues
without due respect for the principle of sovereign
equality. The Human Rights Council, through the
universal periodic review, was a valuable tool for the
impartial, objective and non-selective examination of
human rights situations in all countries. Her delegation
supported the pursuit of constructive dialogue between
concerned parties without resorting to country-specific
resolutions, which merely reflected a policy of double
standards on the part of certain powers.
20. Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
his delegation rejected the continued practice of
introducing country-specific draft resolutions, which
were selective and politically motivated. The universal
periodic review was the main intergovernmental
mechanism mandated to review human rights issues at
the international level for all countries, without
distinction. His delegation did not support the current
draft resolution.
21. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.50 was adopted.
22. Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that constructive dialogue and
confrontation were incompatible and his delegation did
not accept the draft resolution, which had nothing to do
with promoting human rights. Western Governments
were turning a blind eye to human rights concerns in
their own countries by collectively targeting the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
23. The representative of Japan had spoken
impassively about the human rights situation in his
country whereas Japan itself persisted in refusing to
recognize or offer reparation for all kinds of crimes
that it had committed in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, including the forced conscription of
more than 8.4 million young Koreans and the forced
sexual slavery of 200,000 Korean women for the
Japanese army of aggression.
24. Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) said that his
delegation was deeply concerned about the systematic,
widespread and grave violations of human rights by the
rogue regime in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. His Government was disturbed by the lack of
basic human rights in that country, including a total
disregard for freedom of religion and expression; the
severe living conditions in detention centres and prison
camps; and the cruel and despicable treatment of
prisoners, including the use of torture, rape, forced
abortions and public executions.
25. Respect for human rights was a cornerstone of
democratic society and essential for the protection of
human dignity and fundamental freedoms. The passing
of totalitarian leader Kim Jong-Il had presented an
opportunity for the regime to emerge from six decades
of self-inflicted misery and isolation. Unfortunately, no
positive change had been observed as yet. He called on
the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to close its concentration camps and to abide
by its human rights obligations. The regime had tried
forcibly to stop its population from finding a better
life. However, like all people in the world, the citizens
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea were
entitled to basic rights; it was hoped that they would
one day enjoy those human rights. Until then, Canada
would to express its abhorrence of the dire violations
occurring in that country.
26. Mr. Kommasith (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) said that the promotion and protection of
human rights were legitimate interests of the
international community as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. At the same time, differences in the
human rights arena should be addressed on the basis of
mutual respect, taking into account individual
environments and religious backgrounds. TheA/C.3/67/SR.45
5 12-60851
application of double standards should be avoided. The
fact that his delegation had joined the consensus should
not be understood as support for country-specific
resolutions, which were politically motivated and as
such did not help to resolve human rights situations.
27. Mr. Oh (Singapore) said that his delegation
disagreed with the adoption of country-specific draft
resolutions as a matter of principle. However, that
position should not be interpreted as condoning the
mistreatment of citizens in any country. He called on
all countries to respect human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
28. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that his delegation
welcomed the references in the draft resolution to
cooperation between the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and United Nations agencies. He encouraged
that country to engage in close dialogue with the
Organization to assess its needs in terms of
international cooperation and also encouraged the
international community to support the citizens of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by providing
additional capacity-building assistance to that country.
Recalling the humanitarian aid his Government had
already provided, he reiterated Brazil’s willingness to
share its experience in agricultural production and in
the development of programmes and policies on the
right to adequate food. The struggle against hunger and
poverty should be a goal for all countries, regardless of
political differences.
29. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China), expressing support for
the statement made by the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, said that her
delegation wished to dissociate itself from the
consensus on the draft resolution.
30. Mr. Fiallo (Ecuador) said that while his
delegation had joined the consensus, it did not support
country-specific draft resolutions, which rather than
improving human rights situations, most often resulted
in damaging relations between the international
community and the targeted country. The universal
periodic review was the appropriate mechanism to
address human rights violations in all countries.
31. Ms. Sabja (Plurinational State of Bolivia) said
that her delegation did not support country-specific
resolutions, which were selective and politically
motivated and as such had been used to discredit the
former Human Rights Commission. Only an impartial,
non-selective dialogue could help address human rights
concerns effectively: the universal periodic review was
the appropriate mechanism for such dialogue.
32. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) and Ms. Calcinari
Van Der Velde (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
said that their respective delegations wished to
dissociate themselves from the consensus on the draft
resolution for the reasons their delegations had
previously stated.
33. Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that his delegation rejected the statement
made by the representative of Canada, including the
insulting and groundless allegations against the regime
of Kim Jong-Il. He urged the Government of Canada to
renounce its hostile stance against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.51: Situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
34. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
35. Mr. Rishchynski (Canada), speaking as the main
sponsor of the draft resolution, said that the decision to
put forward a draft resolution on the Islamic Republic
of Iran had not been taken lightly. The human rights
situation on the ground had seen no improvement since
the Committee had discussed the issue the previous
year. The Iranian Government’s persistent disregard for
human rights and the egregious nature of its violations
warranted the continued attention of the General
Assembly. It had, moreover, not permitted the Special
Rapporteur to make a visit and carry out his mandate.
36. The sponsors had made an effort accurately and
objectively to reflect in the text the developments over
the past year. As the only body responsible for
international human rights issues within the General
Assembly, the Committee had an obligation to hold the
Government accountable for the very serious human
rights violations and to provide a voice for the Iranian
people.
37. Mr. Rivas (Uruguay) said that while his
delegation was concerned about the human rights
situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran, it also had
noted the progress made by the Iranian Government in
fostering a better environment for the respect of human
rights through the strengthening of dialogue with the
international community. His delegation would abstain
from voting on the draft resolution; he nonethelessA/C.3/67/SR.45
12-60851 6
urged Iran to engage fully with the international
community and to facilitate access for the special
procedures mandate holders.
38. Mr. Zhumabayev (Kazakhstan), speaking on
behalf of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), said that OIC was opposed to the use of
country-specific resolutions, which tended to
selectively targeted developing and Islamic countries.
OIC Member States were opposed to any initiative that
could lead to the use of human rights as a means of
exerting political pressure on developing countries.
The submission of country-specific draft resolutions
did not contribute to improvement of human rights
situations but rather made change more difficult. The
draft resolution currently under consideration
contradicted the spirit of cooperation. Moreover, the
situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran did not
warrant such a resolution. OIC regretted that the draft
resolution had been submitted despite the evidence of
the Islamic Republic of Iran’s cooperation with human
rights mechanisms and the positive developments in
the country. He urged all Member States to oppose the
measure.
39. Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that his delegation opposed the draft
resolution, which was politically motivated and
violated the principles of impartiality and selectivity.
Changes in national human rights situations could not
be imposed by the international community and
country-specific resolutions only undermined trust
between nations and resulted in politicization of United
Nations human rights mechanisms. Human rights
concerns should be addressed through an objective
constructive dialogue.
40. Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
the Iranian people did not need Canada or any other
country to voice its opinion; it had been expressing its
opinion for 33 years, despite the hostility of Canada
and other Western nations. Canada should examine its
own human rights situation, in particular, its record on
the treatment of minority groups, before making
accusations against other countries.
41. He expressed appreciation for the statements
made by the representatives of Cuba, as Coordinator of
the Working Group on Human Rights of the Non-
Aligned Movement, and Kazakhstan, as Chair of the
OIC Council of Foreign Ministers.
42. The draft resolution under consideration — a
clear attempt by the Canadian Government to abuse
human rights mechanisms in order to advance its own
political interests — undermined the potential of the
United Nations to promote human rights and created
further politicization of those issues within the
Organization. The draft resolution contained numerous
unsubstantiated allegations and in no way reflected the
actual human rights situation on the ground. It
moreover did not take account of the internal
mechanisms designed to protect and promote human
rights and overly focused on the rights of just one
minority in Iran, which in fact boasted a diverse
society.
43. The United Nations human rights special
procedures mandate holders assigned to specific
countries were particularly vulnerable to manipulation
and politicization. Selective country-specific
resolutions reduced noble human rights concerns to
manipulative political devices. The international
community had taken great pains to establish the
universal periodic review to ensure respect for the
principles of universality, objectivity, non-selectivity
and impartiality in the work of the United Nations
human rights machinery. Ideally, that mechanism
should make it possible to monitor the human rights
situations in all countries, without distinction. To
cooperate fully with the new mechanism, the Iranian
Government had sent a high-level delegation to
participate in the Human Rights Council Working
Group on the universal periodic review to present
Iran’s national report.
44. His delegation could not accept the draft
resolution, not least because it gave a redundant
mandate to the Secretary-General to compile a report in
parallel with that of the so-called Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran. Despite opposition to such
duplication, the Government of Iran had expressed its
readiness to provide all necessary information for the
preparation of impartial, non-political, accurate and
well-documented reports. The reports of the Secretary-
General were an important mechanism, provided they
were professional and not politicized. Yet the
Secretary-General’s report on the situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran (A/67/327)
overlooked his country’s many achievements and
positive developments in the area of human rights;
suffered from partiality and lack of balance; and hadA/C.3/67/SR.45
7 12-60851
adopted a selective approach to the information
provided. By repeating unfounded, illogical and
unrealistic allegations and resorting to biased sources,
the report had suffered a great loss of credibility.
45. Various reports by United Nations special
procedures mandate holders provided evidence that
Canada and other main sponsors of the draft resolution
were implicated in serious human rights violations;
ironically, none had come under scrutiny through
country-specific resolutions. Certainly, none could
deny the steady increase in importance of
Islamophobia in the West, which had led to grave
violations of the basic rights of Muslims. Specifically,
the Special Rapporteur on violence against women had
reported gross violations of the rights of women,
particularly black women, in United States prisons and
the United States army. The killing of innocent Afghan
women and children in United States drone strikes also
continued on a daily basis, as did the appalling
conditions endured by detainees held in United States
military custody. The Government of Canada, for its
part, exhibited racist behaviour towards minority,
especially indigenous, groups living in its territory.
Lastly, the silence of so-called champions of human
rights before the recent brutal attacks by Israel on
innocent Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip had
illustrated their hypocrisy all too well.
46. The best approach in promoting and protecting
human rights throughout the world was to engage in
meaningful and sincere cooperation. It was regrettable
that the draft resolution targeting the Islamic Republic
of Iran had been prepared solely for political purposes
and thus lacked credibility so far as improving any
human rights situation was concerned. In view of those
considerations, he requested a recorded vote on draft
resolution A/C.3/67/SR.51 and urged all delegations to
vote against it and thus preserve the dignity and
credibility of the United Nations human rights
machinery.
Statements in explanation of vote before the voting
47. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her country remained
firmly opposed to the practice of individually and
selectively condemning certain Member States,
utilizing their human rights situations as a pretext.
Draft resolutions on human rights had become a tool
for promoting specific political interests and for
intensifying a game of strategic confrontation that was
undesirable, incoherent and illegitimate. The sponsors
had themselves committed human rights violations, but
no resolutions had been drafted against them. The only
body competent to hear such matters was the Human
Rights Council, whose universal periodic review
mechanism guaranteed an impartial and objective
review of human rights without singling out
developing nations or any other country that stood in
the way of the interests of powerful, imperialist
countries. Dialogue, mutual respect and transparent,
disinterested international cooperation based on full
respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter were
essential for the promotion and protection of human
rights. Venezuela would therefore vote against the draft
resolution.
48. Mr. Amoros Núñez (Cuba) said that Cuba
wished to reiterate its principled opposition to country-
specific resolutions that essentially targeted developing
countries and had nothing to do with protecting or
advancing human rights. Such tactics had discredited
the earlier Human Rights Commission and had led to
its dissolution. The establishment of the Human Rights
Council, especially its universal periodic review
mechanism, offered a means for examining the human
rights situation in all countries equally, on the basis of
genuine, fruitful dialogue. International cooperation
based on objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity
remained the only path for the effective protection of
human rights. The draft resolution represented the
opposite, and Cuba would therefore vote against it.
49. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) said that his
country rejected the interference of any State in the
affairs of other States on the pretext of defending
human rights. The concept of human rights should be
addressed via a consensual approach based on the
principle of sovereign equality among States, which
had been established when the United Nations was
founded and was clearly enshrined in its Charter. Some
Member States were evidently unhappy with the
Charter and had decided to set new politically-
motivated goals that deviated from the Charter and
international conventions. His delegation believed that
understanding and objective, responsible dialogue
based on mutual respect for national sovereignty,
territorial integrity, non-selectivity and transparency
were the correct way to bring the views of Member
States into closer alignment and to protect human
rights, as well as to guarantee that everyone enjoyed
fundamental freedom and liberty while respectingA/C.3/67/SR.45
12-60851 8
national legislation and paying due attention to
national, regional, cultural and religious differences.
50. The insistence on drafting politically-motivated
human rights resolutions threatened the credibility of
international political and legal frameworks and
undermined the international consensus on the methods
for addressing human rights. More importantly, it
weakened the consensus on the importance of the
universal periodic review. Human rights were of the
utmost importance to his country and nothing was
more harmful to their sanctity than politicizing them
and using them as a ploy, which created a double
standard within the international community. His
delegation would therefore vote against the draft
resolution.
51. Mr. Fiallo (Ecuador) said that his country wholly
supported the work of the Human Rights Council, the
body empowered to address and examine the situation
of human rights, in particular through its universal
periodic review, which was the appropriate mechanism
for advancing human rights and which upheld the
principles of universality, impartiality, objectivity,
equality among States, and non-selectivity. Ecuador
firmly rejected the continued harassment of specific
countries, which had been used in the past to justify
foreign invasions and which served only to worsen the
human rights situations. For all those reasons, Ecuador
would vote against the draft resolution.
52. Ms. Belskaya (Belarus) said that the draft
resolution was one of a number of politically motivated
mechanisms that could not enhance dialogue with the
countries concerned. Her country categorically rejected
such approaches, which undermined the foundations of
the United Nations frameworks for the defence of
human rights. Belarus wished to note that Iran had
adopted the overwhelming majority of
recommendations made as part of its 2010 universal
periodic review. It also wished to note the lack of a
convincing reaction by United Nations human rights
mechanisms in the face of coercive measures
undertaken by various countries against the people of
Iran, which constituted a form of extraterritorial
violation of human rights and deserved the most
serious condemnation. Since there had not been a
single example that would have affirmed the
effectiveness of instruments such as the draft resolution
before the Committee, her country would vote against
it and would maintain that position in the future.
53. Ms. Sabja (Plurinational State of Bolivia) said
that her country firmly supported the principles of non-
interference and respect for sovereignty and would
therefore vote against the draft resolution, which
politicized the protection of human rights and ran
counter to the principles of the United Nations Charter.
The Human Rights Council was the appropriate body
to address human rights situations through a process of
dialogue and constructive examination.
54. At the request of the representative of Iran, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.51.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu.
Against:
Afghanistan, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei
Darussalam, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.A/C.3/67/SR.45
9 12-60851
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, South Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Yemen,
Zambia.
55. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.51 was adopted by 83
votes to 31, with 68 abstentions.
Statements in explanation of vote after the voting
56. Mr. Ruru (Indonesia) said that his delegation
fully supported the efforts of international community
to protect and promote human rights in all countries.
However, those efforts should be based on mutual
respect and genuine international dialogue and
cooperation. The universal periodic review provided a
mechanism for examining the human rights situation in
all Member States on an equal basis and should be
maximized to eliminate selectivity, double standards
and politicization. Indonesia supported efforts to
advance the human rights situation in Iran, but wished
to voice its concern at the absence of any reference to
negotiations in the current draft resolution, which
created a lack of engagement between its sponsors and
the country in question, limiting the opportunity for
improving the human rights situation in that country.
His country had therefore abstained.
57. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that his country’s
abstention did not represent indifference to the issue.
International concern about the situation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in Iran was certainly
legitimate, but the draft resolution did not reflect in
substance or approach the report of either the Special
Rapporteur or the Secretary-General. It included
certain challenges not mentioned in either report and
omitted aspects deemed positive in both. Among the
positive aspects were Iran’s participation in dialogue
with treaty bodies such as the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Human
Rights Council, its participation in the universal
periodic review in 2010, the improvement in its human
development indicators and its adoption of favourable
measures towards Afghan refugees through temporary
residence permits for those with proper documentation.
Moreover, the draft resolution did not mention the
effects of unilateral sanctions on Iran’s socioeconomic
situation, as described in the Secretary-General’s
report.
58. A more objective and balanced approach would
give draft resolutions on specific human rights
situations greater legitimacy. Brazil encouraged Iran to
engage in more constructive dialogue with United
Nations bodies, as well as with the Special Rapporteur,
and to use the Human Rights Council and other United
Nations agencies to strengthen its commitment and
capacities in human rights. The situation of human
rights defenders, lawyers, union leaders, political
dissidents and the lesbian, bisexual and gay community
in Iran was also of concern. Brazil maintained its
position on the renewal of the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur, to be considered in March 2013. It offered
its views in a spirit of constructive dialogue and would
do the same with respect to any other country.
59. Mr. Duale (Somalia) said that the draft resolution
was flawed and unacceptable to his Government for the
reasons given by the chair of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and others. Had his delegation
been present, it would have voted against it.
60. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) said that China had
voted against the draft resolution based on its
consistent opposition to country-specific resolutions on
human rights. No country had a perfect human rights
record, including those that proposed human rights
resolutions.
61. As a developing country, Iran had dedicated itself
to protecting the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of its people. Instead of resorting to country-
specific resolutions as a means for applying pressure,
the international community should provide Iran with
practical and constructive help.
62. Mr. Nishida (Japan) said that Japan had voted in
favour of the draft resolution, on the grounds that many
human rights issues in Iran still required improvement,
including restrictions on freedom of peaceful assemblyA/C.3/67/SR.45
12-60851 10
and association, freedom of opinion and expression,
cruel punishment and the execution of minors. On the
other hand, the Government of Japan had held its
eighth bilateral human rights dialogue with Iran in
September 2012. Japan took the fact that Iran had
agreed to continue talks as a positive sign; in addition,
Iran seemed to have positively engaged with United
Nations human rights treaty bodies. Japan encouraged
Iran to implement the 123 recommendations it had
accepted during the universal periodic review in 2010.
Japan had therefore supported the resolution without
becoming a sponsor and would continue to work
constructively with Iran to achieve improvements in its
human rights situation. His country expected Iran to
continue its dialogue with the international community
and to cooperate with the Office of the High
Commissioner on Human Rights and the Special
Rapporteur.
63. Mr. Labo (Niger) said that his country’s foreign
policy opposed country-specific measures and actions
that targeted individual States. Moreover, there could
be no absolute definitions of good or bad with respect
to the human rights situation in a given country; all
such labels were relative.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.52: Situation of human
rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
64. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
65. Mr. Laram (Qatar), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.52, said that Mauritania, Portugal,
Liechtenstein and Vanuatu had joined the sponsors.
66. The serious violation of the human rights of the
Syrian people, including their right to life, freedom of
expression and self-determination, required a firm
response from the General Assembly commensurate
with the Syrian Government’s flagrant crimes against
its own people. Tens of thousands of innocent people,
most of them women and children, had lost their lives.
In view of the deteriorating humanitarian situation and
the danger to neighbouring countries, whose citizens
had already taken in thousands of Syrian refugees, it
was also important to bear in mind the regional
implications, including the threat to regional peace and
security. That situation was compounded by crimes
involving children and crimes against humanity, as
recalled in statements by the Secretary-General, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and human rights organizations.
67. The draft resolution had drawn on wording from
relevant resolutions on the human rights situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic that had been adopted by the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council, relying on the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and the main
human rights instruments, and with due respect for
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and unity, and taking into account resolutions adopted
by the League of Arab States and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
68. Human rights violations deserved to be
condemned regardless of their source, but violations by
the opposition could not be compared to the systematic
massacres committed daily by a Government that
claimed to be legitimate and whose structure controlled
State services and possessed a huge military arsenal.
69. Adoption of the draft resolution would send a
message to the brave Syrian people who had been
suffering for 20 months. It would also express the
indignation of the international community and its
determination to find a solution that would guarantee
the fundamental right of the Syrian people to the rule
of law and equality and to see those who had
committed such heinous crimes against them brought
to justice.
70. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) said that
some delegations were using the Third Committee to
advance their own political goals in violation of the
Charter and international humanitarian law, distracting
the Committee from its true humanitarian objectives
and setting a regrettable precedent with respect to the
role of the international community in protecting and
promoting human rights. That situation was all the
more regrettable because three members of the Arab
League had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution
and were being used by the West to interfere in Syrian
internal affairs. It was clear to anyone, however, that
the Arab States had become the tool of interventionist
Western policies that threatened the possibility of
common Arab action.
71. Even worse, those Arab States had presented their
draft resolution against Syria on the very same day that
Israeli planes were bombing Gaza. Qatar was one of
the countries that, by sponsoring the draft resolution,
had given invaluable support to Israeli aggression. ItA/C.3/67/SR.45
11 12-60851
was clear that the League of Arab States had become a
tool to divide the Gulf. What remained of the League
was prepared to offer its services to any party that
sought to harm Arab countries. Despite its oil, it was
politically, ethically and financially bankrupt. The
Secretary-General of the League had even addressed a
message of gratitude to the European Commission,
thanking it for offering to finance crisis cells within the
League.
72. His delegation wished to know why all those
merchants and couriers of human rights, whether Arab
or not, had shown no enthusiasm whatsoever for the
Arab Spring in Palestine. Apparently their courage had
failed them when it came to Israel. The representative
of Morocco had said earlier that the three main
sponsors — Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Morocco —
hoped for a Syrian society based on the principles of
equality, justice, non-discrimination, democracy and
the rule of law. Syria agreed; in fact, the Syrian people
hoped to create a Syrian democracy that met Syrian
needs — not a bloodthirsty salafist, Wahhabist or
takfirist democracy based on religion or petrodollars
and imposed by foreigners through armed violence that
turned whole segments of society against each other.
The Syrian people needed a society free from foreign
meddling by countries like Qatar and Saudi Arabia,
which paid lip service to human rights but whose
Governments lacked a parliament and stifled their own
opposition.
73. Just a day earlier, the mufti of Saudi Arabia, who
functioned as that country’s general prosecutor, had
issued a fatwa holding that anyone who criticized the
country’s leaders on websites and satellite channels
would be considered an infidel, which paved the way
for the murder of dissidents in Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
Neither country was party to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; his own
country had acceded in 1969, before Qatar had won
independence from the United Kingdom and before the
Covenant had entered into force. That comparison was
important for understanding the true motives behind
the sponsorship of the draft resolution against his
country. Their draft resolution justified the murderous
actions of terrorist armed groups against Syria and
downplayed their crimes. Yet surely the murders,
amputations, decapitations, expulsion of citizens on the
basis of religion and decimation of entire families were
violations that should be condemned. Perhaps the
sponsors had in mind some kind of legitimate terrorism
against the Syrian people, especially women, children
and the elderly, whose murders were financed and
protected by Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Libya, Turkey,
France and Great Britain. Some countries, namely
Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Qatar, were an integral part
of the problem and were sponsors of the violence and
religious discord. It was shameful that some countries
of the Arab League and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation had imposed inhuman economic, political
and social sanctions that threatened the human rights of
Syrians in violation of the principled position of the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, which had condemned those measures
and refused to submit draft resolutions on the human
rights situations in individual countries.
74. It was also shameful that many wealthy member
nations of those two organizations were offering no
assistance to the Syrian people while giving hundreds
of millions of dollars to terrorist mercenaries and Al
Qaeda, who were shedding innocent blood in Syria and
destroying infrastructure, and that they were urging the
Security Council to condemn the situation in Mali
while financing those same groups to conduct terrorist
activities in Syria. His delegation saluted the countries
that refused to go along with such a flagrant political
lie.
75. Countries like Qatar should leave Syria alone and
not claim to feel sympathy for its children when their
feelings were murderous. Nor should they spend their
petrodollars to help terrorists, agents of destruction and
criminals. If they really cared about the wellbeing of
the Syrian people they should lift their sanctions, end
their media wars, stop their sectarian incitement and
obscurantist aggression and cease exploiting the great,
tolerant religion of Islam and distorting it with
Wahhabist or salafist thinking.
76. The draft resolution blamed the Syrian
Government for everything that happened without
condemning the armed terrorist groups and the
countries that manipulated them. The countries that
prepared the draft resolution had not bothered to call
for the cessation of violence or for national dialogue to
resolve the crisis in accordance with the principles of
the peaceful settlement of disputes, as set forth in the
six-point plan, the Geneva Declaration and the mission
of United Nations Special Envoy Lakhdar Brahimi.
The draft resolution looked at events in Syria from a
very narrow point of view. His delegation wondered if
the sponsors had ever read the hundreds ofA/C.3/67/SR.45
12-60851 12
international media reports, such as the report of the
chair of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry, Mr. Paulo Pinheiro, who in New York in
October 2012 had noted the presence in Syria of
foreign fighters from 11 countries, and not only
neighbouring ones. On behalf of his Government, he
had sent an official message to the Secretary-General
with the names of 143 foreign terrorists, including
Libyans, Tunisians, Saudis, Qataris and others, who
had been killed.
77. Like all Member States, his country was
experiencing a number of problems that must be solved
by implementing comprehensive reform in many areas
of political, economic and social life. However, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter and
international law, such reform should be instituted at
the national level and not through political resolutions
brokered by certain Member States to exploit other
countries.
78. Lastly, preambular paragraph 7 of the draft
resolution stated that the countries adopting the
resolution were committed to the sovereignty of the
Syrian Arab Republic and to its independence, unity
and territorial integrity, and that they wished to express
their devotion to the principles of the United Nations
Charter. He wondered how that attitude could be
reconciled with interference in Syria’s internal affairs
on the part of Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Turkey.
79. His delegation called on Member States to
respect human rights, to act according to their
conscience and to adhere to the facts without
politicizing them or resorting to plots or threats. His
Government sought to protect its sovereignty, to
improve society and to make progress through serious
change, and it enjoyed the support and trust of the
majority of the Syrian people. His delegation called for
a recorded vote on draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.52 in
order to protect the dignity and credibility of the
human rights mechanisms of the United Nations. He
called upon all States to vote against the draft
resolution and against interference in the affairs of
other States.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.