United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.39
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
14 December 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-58818 (E)
*0758818*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 39th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 8 November 2007, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (continued)
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 67: Indigenous issues (continued)
(a) Indigenous issues (continued)
(b) Second International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People (continued)
Agenda item 106: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 68: Elimination of racism and racial discrimination (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism and racial discrimination (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)*
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)*
__________________
* Items which the Committee has decided to consider together.A/C.3/62/SR.39
07-58818 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.29. L.33, L.34,
L.42 and L.44)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29: Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty
1. Mr. Makanga (Gabon), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29, said that, since 1948, the
number of countries having abolished the death penalty
for all crimes had increased from 8 to 130. Only 25
countries had carried out executions in 2006. Many
States had declared a moratorium on executions while
reviewing the utility of the death penalty, which was a
human rights issue. Moreover, the probability that
innocent people might be executed was significant. The
sponsors did not try to impose their views on other
States but rather to reinforce the growing trend towards
a phasing out of the death penalty. Burundi, Cambodia,
the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Mali, Mozambique and
Rwanda had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
2. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Côte d’Ivoire and South Africa had also joined the
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.33: Declaration on the
Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and
Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
3. Mr. Heines (Norway), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.33, said that, as a result of
ongoing consultations, a revised text would probably
be issued in the following week. Albania, Denmark,
Georgia, Micronesia (the Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Nigeria, Portugal, Slovenia and the
United States of America had joined the list of
sponsors of the draft resolution.
4. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Austria, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Israel, Jordan, Latvia, Luxembourg, Moldova,
Poland, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste
and Turkey had also joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.34: Protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons
5. Mr. Valvatne (Norway), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.34, said that a revised text to be
issued probably after ongoing consultations would not
contain the current second preambular paragraph. No
changes were proposed regarding the mandate of the
Representative of the Secretary-General on human
rights of internally displaced persons, since it would be
reviewed by the Human Rights Council shortly.
Albania, Croatia, Guatemala, Italy, Micronesia (the
Federated States of), Montenegro and Ukraine had
joined the list of sponsors of the draft resolution.
6. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Angola, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cape
Verde, the Congo, the Czech Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Latvia, Mexico, Peru, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Timor-Leste and Turkey had also joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L 42: Elimination of all forms
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion
or belief
7. Ms. Martins (Portugal), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.42 on behalf of the European
Union and the other sponsors, said that education and
dialogue were crucial to achieving greater tolerance,
respect and mutual understanding. The current draft
was a streamlined version of the 2006 consensus text
and contained some new elements. Albania, Canada,
Georgia, Guatemala, Iceland, Moldova and the United
States of America had joined the sponsors.
8. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Andorra, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cape
Verde, Chile, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, San Marino, Thailand and Timor-Leste
had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.44: Subregional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
9. Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo),
introducing draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.44 on behalf of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the other sponsors, stressed that theA/C.3/62/SR.39
3 07-58818
Centre’s regional capacities should be enhanced with a
view to greater effectiveness and efficiency.
10. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Kenya, Liberia, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Mali, Morocco,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, the Sudan, Uganda, Zambia and
Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.36)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.36: Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol
11. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.36, noted that it was a concise procedural
text and that Austria, Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, the Czech Republic, the Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Italy,
Jordan, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and Uruguay had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
12. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, France, Greece,
Guatemala, Jamaica, Latvia, Liberia, Lithuania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Paraguay, the Philippines, Romania, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, Tunisia, Turkey and Uganda had
also joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.1, L.19/Rev.1, L.58 and L.59)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.1: Eliminating
rape and other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including as instruments to achieve
political or military objectives
13. The Chairman invited the Committee to take
action on draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.1 and its
amendments, contained in documents A/C.3/62/L.58
and A/C.3/62/L.59.
14. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Secretariat would inform the Committee as
soon as information on the programme budget
implications of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.1
was available.
15. Mr. Hagen (United States of America) requested
a postponement of action on the draft resolution. He
also informed the Committee that Armenia, Austria,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Chile, Croatia,
Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Georgia, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iraq, Japan, Liberia, Lithuania, Malta, the
Marshall Islands, Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Norway, Panama, and San Marino had joined the
sponsors.
16. The Chairman said he took it that the
Committee wished to defer action on the draft
resolution.
17. It was so decided.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.19/Rev.1: Improvement of
the situation of women in rural areas
18. The Chairman informed the Committee that
draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.19/Rev.1 had no
programme budget implications.
19. Mr. Sodnom (Mongolia) pointed out that the
sixth, eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth preambular
paragraphs, and paragraphs 2 (g) and (i) of draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.19/Rev.1 were new and that the
words “and violence” should be deleted from the text
of paragraph 2 (d). Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Costa
Rica, South Africa, Tajikistan and Uruguay had joined
the sponsors.
20. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Barbados, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Guyana, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Liberia, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Mali, Namibia, the Philippines, the Sudan,
Tunisia, Zambia and Zimbabwe had also joined the
sponsors.
21. The Chairman said that he took it that the
Committee wished to adopt draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.19/Rev.1, as orally revised, without a vote.
22. It was so decided.
23. Ms. Duncan-Lira (United States of America),
explaining her delegation’s position on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.19/Rev.1, said that the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action presented an important policy
framework that did not create international legal rightsA/C.3/62/SR.39
07-58818 4
or impose legally binding obligations on States under
international law. The references to the Declaration and
Platform for Action and their periodic reviews did not
create rights, or create or recognize the right to
abortion. Those instruments could therefore not be
interpreted as constituting support for, or endorsement
or promotion of, abortion. The United States supported
the treatment of women who suffered injuries or
illnesses caused by legal or illegal abortion including
post-abortion care and did not regard such treatment as
abortion-related services. Sexual and reproductive
health did not include abortion, nor did it constitute
support for, or endorsement or promotion of, abortion
or the use of abortifacients.
24. Mr. Suarez (Columbia) said that, since the fifth
preambular paragraph did not include an express
reference to the situation of indigenous women in rural
areas, his delegation interpreted it to mean that
attention was being paid in general to the improvement
of the situation of indigenous women in rural areas.
Agenda item 67: Indigenous issues (continued)
(A/62/286 and Corr.1)
(a) Indigenous issues (continued)
(b) Second International Decade of the World’s
Indigenous People (continued)
25. The Chairman invited the Committee to resume
its consideration of agenda item 67 and suggested that
the Committee, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 55/448, should take note of the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms of indigenous people (A/62/286
and Corr.1).
26. It was so decided.
27. The Chairman said that the Committee had
thereby concluded its consideration of agenda item 67.
Agenda item 106: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued) (A/62/84)
28. The Chairman suggested that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 55/448, the
Committee should take note of the note by the
Secretary-General (A/62/84) transmitting the report of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime on
its third session, held in Vienna from 9 to
18 October 2006 (CTOC/COP/2006/14).
29. It was so decided.
30. The Chairman informed the Committee that it
had concluded its consideration of agenda item 106.
Agenda item 68: Elimination of racism and racial
discrimination (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism and racial discrimination
(continued) (A/62/306)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action (continued) (A/62/375 and A/62/480)
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued) (A/62/184 and A/62/301)
31. Ms. Salayeva (Azerbaijan) said that there was no
conflict between the principle of the territorial integrity
of States and the right of peoples to self-determination
because that right contained important restrictive
provisions which prevented it from being exercised in
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States. Major international instruments contained
restrictive provisions to the effect that the right to self-
determination must not be construed as authorizing or
encouraging action that would impair the territorial
integrity or political unity of sovereign and
independent States acting in compliance with the
principle of equal rights and self-determination.
32. However, conflict between the principle of the
territorial integrity of States and that of the right of
peoples to self-determination arose when attempts were
made to apply the principle of self-determination to the
protection of the rights of national minorities. Her
Government believed strongly that the rights of
national minorities should be considered as part of
human rights law, and in order to preserve the rights of
national minorities, the principle of self-determination
might be applied in various forms. Such an approach
did not contradict the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity within which human rights,
including minority rights, could be ensured.
33. The principle of self-determination did not confer
a right to unilateral secession upon a specific subset of
a country’s population, which would threaten political
unity, territorial integrity and the stability of Member
States. The recent adoption of the United NationsA/C.3/62/SR.39
5 07-58818
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People by the
General Assembly had demonstrated the inviolability
of the principles of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of States. Self-rule within existing borders
was the way to settle the conflict in the south
Caucasus.
34. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that the right to resist
occupation was no less sacred than the right to self-
defence, especially when facing illegal situations on
the ground. Israel continued to prevent the Palestinian
people from exercising their undeniable right to self-
determination, through the establishment of an
independent State on their occupied lands. The report
of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a
means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
(A/62/301) had raised concern about the role of private
companies operating in the security field. They had
exacerbated conflict situations and undermined
international mechanisms aimed at curbing the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.
35. His delegation endorsed the Working Group’s
recommendations on the need to reinforce the role of
the State in regulating the activities of such companies,
and to strengthen national mechanisms to monitor their
work. At the same time, he highlighted the importance
of consolidating efforts to enhance the national
capacity of States emerging from conflict to develop
their security sectors on the basis of the principle of
national ownership and to support the activities of the
Working Group in order to enable it to carry out its
role.
36. Egypt looked forward to specific
recommendations by the Secretary-General on enabling
the Human Rights Council to investigate and address
the Israeli human rights violations in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory. Israel’s actions had contributed to
the rise in poverty and unemployment to their highest
levels in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, including East
Jerusalem. Furthermore, the ability of the Palestinian
people to exercise their legitimate right to self-
determination and to establish an independent
sovereign State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, had
been severely curtailed.
37. He reiterated the importance of strengthening the
United Nations role in dealing with the protection of
the human rights of the Palestinian people, along with
other Arab people who were under occupation and
systematically subjected to violations and intrusion.
Egypt also looked forward to greater engagement on
the part of the Organization, through its role in the
Quartet, in confidence-building efforts to achieve a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace founded on the
terms of reference of the peace process and the Arab
Peace Initiative. His delegation also hoped for greater
United Nations engagement in ensuring the enjoyment
of the right to self-determination and other human
rights by all people.
38. The voting on the draft resolutions in the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee had signalled
overwhelming support for granting self-rule and the
right to self-determination to territories and peoples
under occupation. There was still a minority, however,
that felt entitled to control the destiny of others,
obliterate their identity and heritage, and force them
into subjugation. As the international community
approached the end of the Second International Decade
for the Elimination of Colonialism, the United Nations
should reaffirm its commitment to implementing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples. Firm steps should be
taken to liberate all people from foreign control and to
guarantee their enjoyment of the right to self-
determination.
39. Mr. Nikooharaf Tamiz (Islamic Republic of
Iran) said that the first organizational session of the
preparatory committee for the Durban Review
Conference had been timely considering the
unprecedented increase in racism in various parts of
the world. There had been an alarming increase in
racist violence, xenophobic literature and religious
intolerance masquerading as an exercise of freedom of
expression, particularly in Western countries. That
important freedom should not infringe on other rights,
including the right to freedom of religion of Muslim
minority populations.
40. Attempts were being made to suppress cultural
diversity and expression. Most worryingly, a culture of
Islamophobia was entering into political ideologies.
The tendency to view differences in world religions as
a clash posed a real threat to international peace and
security. Insulting religions should be criminalized
internationally, and associating the fight against
terrorism with individual religions should be seen as a
clear manifestation of racism and thus prevented.A/C.3/62/SR.39
07-58818 6
41. The gross and systematic violation of human
rights in the Occupied Palestinian Territories remained
a matter of deep concern. The international community
should continue to work to enforce the full
implementation of all relevant United Nations
resolutions, including Human Rights Council
resolution S-1/1. His delegation welcomed the report
of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967
on implementation of General Assembly resolution
60/251 (A/HRC/4/17), which described some of the
racist activities of the occupying Power.
42. Living conditions in Gaza were bleak. The
indiscriminate and excessive use of force against
civilians, the destruction of infrastructure and
restrictions on freedom of movement constituted a
gross form of collective punishment. The Wall
currently under construction in Palestinian territory,
checkpoints, settlements, house demolitions, targeted
assassinations and other violations infringed a wide
range of civil and political rights. The General
Assembly must speak up for the human rights of the
Palestinian people and demand an end to Israel’s
occupation. Joint action against racism was urgently
needed more than ever before. His Government stood
ready to cooperate closely with the international
community to eradicate that scourge.
43. Mr. Hijazi (Observer for Palestine) said that the
Palestinian people had been victims of racism for
nearly a century. Hundreds of thousands had been
forcibly expelled, denied identity cards and stripped of
their livelihoods and dignity. Generations had since
been born and lived their lives as refugees. Currently,
millions were denied the inherent human right of return
to their homes, while any person of the Jewish faith
born anywhere in the world enjoyed the right of
immigration and citizenship. Israeli law guaranteed the
right of so-called return based on religion and race, and
Israeli politicians shamelessly referred to the supposed
demographic danger posed by the indigenous
non-Jewish Palestinian population.
44. The 40-year Israeli occupation constituted an
illegitimate, institutionalized system of colonization,
racial discrimination and apartheid. Israel, the
occupying Power, had violated the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid
and other instruments of international human rights and
humanitarian law.
45. Nearly 3 million Palestinians in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, were denied the right to
move freely within the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
In the meantime, about 460,000 Israeli settlers enjoyed
a sophisticated network of Israeli roads to which
Palestinians were denied access unless they obtained a
permit. The oppressive and often degrading permit
system was a morally repugnant replica of the
apartheid pass system.
46. Israel continued to construct the illegal separation
Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem, despite the clear ruling of the
International Court of Justice in 2004 that the Wall and
the settlements for which it was being built were illegal
and must be dismantled. The colonialist Wall reflected
the Israeli Government’s racist ideology of separation
and exclusivity and thwarted the chances for an
independent Palestinian State. The decades of
oppression and racism experienced by the Palestinian
people could be redressed only through the exercise of
their inalienable right to self-determination.
47. Ms. Eilon Shahar (Israel) said that the Nazi
atrocities of the Holocaust had shown the harrowing
power and darkness of human hate. The substantial
educational work and advocacy undertaken by Member
States over time had helped to stem the belief that one
race was superior or inferior to another and that
different races should remain segregated. The right to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion applied
equally to all — to theistic, to non-theistic and to
atheistic believers alike, no matter their creed or lack
thereof. Her delegation therefore welcomed the interim
report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (А/62/306). Israel was committed to
implementing the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
While the Government recognized that more could
always be done to ensure the rights and equality of all
people, progress was continuously being made.
48. However, the problem of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
worldwide, particularly regarding anti-Semitism,
remained acute. In 2006, 590 cases of deliberate
violence and vandalism against Jews had been
registered worldwide, an increase of 31 per cent fromA/C.3/62/SR.39
7 07-58818
the previous year. Most troubling, the wave of anti-
Semitic activity had appeared predominately in Europe
and the Middle East. Similarly, the Islamic Republic of
Iran had increased its campaign of Holocaust denial
and anti-Semitic activities. In December 2006, it had
held a conference on Holocaust denial for pseudo-
academics and so-called experts. The gathering had
been nothing less than a political tirade against the
State of Israel and Jews, thinly masked as an exercise
in free speech and expression and should serve as a
wake-up call for the international community to stand
resolutely against that dangerous regime and condemn
its racist ideology.
49. In contrast, General Assembly resolution 61/255
sent a clear message to Holocaust deniers that hatred
and sheer racism were unacceptable. Her delegation
also commended the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization resolution 34 C/49
on Holocaust remembrance of October 2007. Israel
shared the concerns of the Special Rapporteur
regarding the rise in all types of racism. The deplorable
surge in racist activity merited a stronger emphasis on
intercultural dialogue and a real commitment on the
part of political leaders to combat all forms of
prejudice, particularly relating to Islamophobia and
anti-Semitism. The vision that all men and women
were created in the divine image and must therefore be
treated with equality, dignity and respect, had been
promoted by the prophets of Israel since antiquity. In
order to combat the scourge of racism effectively, there
must be a manifest will to put aside political
considerations and embrace diversity.
50. Mr. Qwayder (Jordan) said that his country had
been a party to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
since 1974 and was proud that its citizens enjoyed
equality and rights without discrimination as
guaranteed by its Constitution. His Government was
troubled by the rise in racism and xenophobia in many
places in the world, and in particular by attempts to
link Islam with terrorism. The 2004 Amman Message
had set out the principles of true Islam and called for
dialogue among religions and a culture of tolerance.
51. His country had signed and ratified
17 international human rights instruments and
welcomed United Nations initiatives against racism,
including the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance
and the resulting Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action, the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, and
the three Decades to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination. However, more needed to be done, and
his country welcomed the upcoming Durban Review
Conference, which the Human Rights Council had been
making preparations for.
52. Mr. Vundavalli (India) commended the report of
the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (A/62/306), which had drawn the
international community’s attention to the rise in racist
political platforms and violence. His delegation
concurred with him that the United Nations should
strengthen its role in promoting inter-faith and inter-
cultural dialogue and that the commitments made in the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action must be
implemented in order to foster social harmony.
53. India also commended the report of the Working
Group on the use of mercenaries as a means of
violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right of peoples to self-determination (A/62/301). It
had maintained unwavering support for and solidarity
with the people of Palestine in their struggle to regain
their inalienable rights, including the right to self-
determination. His country had consistently urged the
resumption of a direct dialogue among the main parties
through the Quartet principals and supported the
Quartet Performance-based Roadmap to a Permanent
Two-State Solution to the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
(S/2003/529).
54. Attempts continued to be made at the United
Nations and elsewhere to reinvent some of the basic
principles of the Charter, such as the right to self-
determination, and to apply them selectively for
narrow political ends. The right to self-determination
must not be abused to encourage secession and harm
pluralistic and democratic States. Moreover, it must not
be misinterpreted as a right of a group, on the basis of
ethnicity, religion or race, to undermine the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State.
55. His delegation therefore regretted the
unacceptable references to the Indian State of Jammu
and Kashmir made by the delegation of Pakistan. The
Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir was an integral
part of the Union of India. Its people had exercised
their right of self-determination at the time of India’s
independence and repeatedly and regularly participatedA/C.3/62/SR.39
07-58818 8
in free, fair and open elections at all levels. In contrast,
Pakistan pretended to be a protector of human rights
while denying even a semblance of such rights to the
people of Pakistani-occupied Kashmir and to the
people of Pakistan itself. Pakistani authorities would
do well to listen to their own people, including the
judiciary, who were demanding human rights and the
rule of law. Some references in the statement made by
the representative of Pakistan constituted an attempt to
divide the ranks of those who supported the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination. It
would never succeed in its efforts.
56. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that it
was regrettable that the Third Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination had failed to
achieve its goals, and she hoped that efforts to
implement the goals of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action would be stepped up.
Defamation of religions and assertions of cultural
supremacism were on the rise, and organized racism
directed against Arabs and Muslims in the name of the
struggle against terrorism was setting back the struggle
against racism.
57. In her own region, Palestinians and Syrians
continued to be displaced by settlements based on a
racist ideology that aimed to alter the demographic
makeup of the occupied territories. The continued
construction of the racist separation barrier by Israel
displayed flagrant disregard for the very international
system that had established it as a State in the first
place. Israel behaved like a recalcitrant child towards
the United Nations, which had presided over its birth
but neglected to educate it properly. Former President
Jimmy Carter, Archbishop Desmond Tutu and
numerous United Nations reports had covered those
issues, and his delegation looked forward to seeing
them addressed at the upcoming Durban Review
Conference.
58. The right to self-determination had been affirmed
by the Charter of the United Nations, numerous
General Assembly resolutions and the International
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights. It was saddening to see the
United Nations work diligently to ensure the right of
self-determination for remote islands with populations
of a few thousand while it failed to hold Israel
accountable for depriving millions of Palestinians of
that right. Ensuring the Palestinian people’s right of
self-determination was a political and moral obligation
for the international community that was being flouted
daily by Israel and its supporters.
59. Mr. Schulz (Observer for the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
(IFRC)) said that IFRC attached great importance to
the effective implementation by Governments of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, but
unfortunately, there did not seem to be as strong a
commitment to practical measures and actions as had
been expected when the Declaration had been adopted
in 2001. Nor were there yet any signs of preparations
for the proposed 2009 Review Conference to move
from procedural discussions to a more substantive
debate. Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies were at
work on aspects of the Durban Declaration and the
Programme of Action everywhere in the world and
reported a need for much more proactive engagement
at the national and local levels.
60. In 2003, the IFRC had delivered a pledge at the
twenty-eighth International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent entitled “Non-discrimination
and respect for diversity”. It would be reporting on the
implementation of its commitments at the thirtieth
International Conference, which would start later in the
month in Geneva. One item to be reported on was the
establishment of a Diversity Action Group within the
Federation’s Secretariat in Geneva. Its terms of
reference emphasized the value of difference, and
called for actions to improve diversity. Promoting
respect for diversity also meant inclusion, and
accepting marginalized and discriminated groups as
actors, not only as victims. They must be part of
project design, implementation and evaluation,
contributing to the planning stage from their
experiences.
61. The Federation’s work on non-discrimination and
respect for diversity had also been linked to operational
activities. Disaster emergency and response
programmes could not be considered successful and
comprehensive unless they also promoted human
dignity through respect for diversity and the rejection
of discrimination. Disaster preparedness and response
must extend to the entire population, without any
distinction based on race, religion or ethnicity. Action
must also cater to the specific needs of different
communities and persons with different vulnerabilities.
62. IFRC was working to create a new energy to
address the existing challenges within the frameworkA/C.3/62/SR.39
9 07-58818
of the Durban agenda. It hoped to build enhanced
response mechanisms in cooperation with Governments,
international organizations, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), the private sector, national
human rights institutions and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). One
vehicle for that would be its thirtieth International
Conference, which would consider the adoption of a
declaration entitled “Together for Humanity”. The draft
declaration was centred on the humanitarian
consequences of four major challenges facing the
world today. Two of those challenges related directly to
the Durban agenda, dealing with racism, discrimination
and xenophobia. Both called for a much stronger
response by Governments and civil society, which
should reflect a new commitment to the political will
that was essential to making a success of programmes
intended to combat racism and discrimination and
further promote human dignity and diversity.
63. The fight against discrimination must be waged
on all fronts. Stigma and marginalization accompanied
all forms of discrimination, but remarkable
contributions to the fight against stigma had been made
by groups such as people living with HIV/AIDS or
persons with disabilities. It was time to offer more
opportunities to the victims of racism and racial
discrimination to participate in the fight as actors,
rather than simply to typecast them as victims. IFRC
hoped to see new thinking on the subject as part of the
Durban Review process.
64. Ms. Abdelhak (Algeria), speaking in exercise of
the right of reply, noted that for the second time the
Moroccan delegation had exercised a right of reply in
relation to statements by her delegation on the subject
of Western Sahara, statements that had never referred
to Morocco or commented on its positions. Western
Sahara was a non-self-governing territory, and the idea
of its being Moroccan had been rejected by the
International Court of Justice in 1975.
65. In its statement, Morocco had rejected the right
of the Algerian delegation to give it moral lessons on
self-determination. Algeria was morally qualified to
take a strong position on the right of peoples to self-
determination since it had itself waged a war of
liberation that had cost it a million and a half martyrs
and which had culminated in the referendum on self-
determination. Since then, it had unceasingly supported
the right of all peoples under foreign domination to
self-determination.
66. Secondly, Morocco had become indignant at the
parallel that it thought had been drawn by her
delegation between Palestine and Western Sahara. In
its statement of the day before, the Algerian delegation
had touched on the right to self-determination by
quoting the example of two peoples who were still not
able to exercise that right, those of Palestine and
Western Sahara, without making any comparison
whatsoever. But upon reflection, the comparison
between Palestinians and Saharans was apposite, and
she thanked Morocco for having drawn attention to the
similarities between them: two peoples robbed of their
land, resisting through a popular intifada in order to
regain their right to self-determination.
67. Morocco had described the Algerian position as
cynical since it had allegedly proposed the partition of
Western Sahara. What was cynical was the malicious
mythomania that Morocco was demonstrating by
seeking to impute to Algeria the responsibility for the
idea of dividing up Western Sahara. Morocco had
accused Algeria of living in the past. Algeria was not
ashamed of the past and built the present using the past
as a foundation. Since Morocco had failed every time
to live up to its commitments, Algeria found it easy to
understand that it would wish to erase the traces of the
years of effort expended by the international
community in the search for a fair and lasting solution
to the question of Western Sahara.
68. While recalling the past, the Algerian delegation
had evoked the present in quoting Security Council
resolution 1754 (2007), which called upon the parties
to the conflict, Morocco and the Polisario Front, to
enter into direct negotiations. Algeria had also urged
the international community to support the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for the
implementation of that resolution so that the
negotiations could succeed and a just and lasting
solution be found to the conflict over Western Sahara
which would be in full conformity with international
law.
69. Finally, Morocco, had expressed surprise at
Algeria’s conception of its status as an observer. She
would say it again: Algeria was a neighbouring country
and an observer in the matter of Western Sahara. An
observer made observations, which in the case of
Algeria were constructive. It was with responsibility
and calm that her country took on the status of an
observer. Morocco would not succeed in sowing doubts
as to the implications or the nature of her country’sA/C.3/62/SR.39
07-58818 10
interest in the issue, an interest which focused
exclusively on building a future of peace, stability and
prosperity in the region.
70. Mr. Al-Saif (Kuwait), speaking in exercise of the
right of reply, recalled that at the afternoon meeting on
Wednesday, 31 October, the representative of Israel
had referred to a situation in Kuwait in 1991. What the
Israeli delegate had said was a regrettable and unwise
attempt to muffle the support of Kuwait for the
Palestinian people and the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied by Israel since 1967. It was notable that the
website of the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs
referred to the latter only as “a United Nations human
rights rapporteur”. A rapporteur for what issue? God
and the rest of the world knew — excluding, of course,
the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
71. Unless Israel acknowledged and put an end to its
occupation of the West Bank including East Jerusalem,
Gaza and the Golan Heights, it could count on Kuwait
and most of the countries of the world to bring its
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law to the attention of
the Committee and other international forums. Any
problems that Israel had with what the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967
had mentioned in his latest report would not go away
with misleading statements by the delegation of Israel.
72. Lastly, he wished to cite the view expressed by a
famous Israeli figure about the behaviour of his
country. Avraham Burg, the Speaker of the Israeli
Parliament from 1993 to 2003, had stated in an article
written in 2003: “It turns out that the 2,000-year
struggle for Jewish survival comes down to a state of
settlements, run by an amoral clique of corrupt
lawbreakers who are deaf both to their citizens and to
their enemies”.
73. Mr. Hayee (Pakistan), speaking in exercise of the
right of reply, said that Pakistan rejected the statement
delivered earlier by the delegation of India, in
particular its assertion that the state of Jammu and
Kashmir was an integral part of the Union of India.
The state of Jammu and Kashmir was not an integral
part of India; it was a disputed territory under United
Nations resolutions which were still awaiting
implementation.
74. No one should offer lessons in human rights to
his country, particularly not the delegation of India,
which was itself illegally occupying Jammu and
Kashmir, in violation of Security Council resolutions.
That occupation was being sustained by an
unprecedented and massive concentration of security
forces and was characterized by the use of rape as a
weapon of State policy to suppress the indigenous
struggle of the people for self-determination. India’s
systematic human rights violations had been well
documented by various international human rights
organizations.
75. Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco), speaking in exercise
of the right of reply, said that he represented a nation
with 14 centuries of history, one that was not afraid of
Algeria or of anyone, because it knew that its cause
was just. The parallel that had been drawn the day
before by the Algerian delegation was unacceptable
and irresponsible, while at the current meeting Algeria
had once again given an astonishing display of its
intransigence on the question of the Sahara.
76. Dealing with the issue entailed a need to be
objective, to have a sense of measure and moderation.
He was not certain that those words meant anything to
the Algerian delegation. The matter was in the hands of
the Security Council and a process of negotiation was
in progress. He had said it before and would repeat it:
Morocco energetically supported the process of
negotiation. Algeria had said that it was speaking out
for the right to self-determination, but there were
already negotiations in progress. Algeria could not be
an uninvolved observer and try at the same time to
prejudice the outcome of the negotiations, by imposing
its point of view on the delegations that were
negotiating.
77. Furthermore, when one defended a principle and
the exercise thereof, as a matter of intellectual honesty
one needed to observe a minimum level of standards
concerning respect for human rights. He would have
liked to hear Algeria address the Committee on a
number of questions that concerned its domestic
situation, for example the situation of the refugees in
the camps of Tindouf, who had been living in
lamentable conditions for more than 30 years. The
question of the Sahara had to be resolved. It was within
the hands of the Security Council and could not
eternally be the outlet for Algeria’s domestic problems.
Morocco had no problem with Algeria. But he fearedA/C.3/62/SR.39
11 07-58818
that Algeria had a problem with itself and that there
was not very much that anyone could do for it.
78. Mr. Vundavalli (India), speaking in exercise of
the right of reply, recalled that India and Pakistan were
discussing a number of outstanding issues bilaterally in
the framework of the Composite Dialogue. Four rounds
of the dialogue had been held between 2004 and 2007,
and those discussions would continue in future also.
The Composite Dialogue, which dealt with a range of
subjects, had led to a significant improvement in
bilateral relations and was predicated on the
commitments made to India by President Musharraf of
Pakistan on 6 January 2004 that Pakistan would not
permit any territory under its control to be used to
support terrorism in any manner.
79. Jammu and Kashmir was an integral part of India.
In the course of the Composite Dialogue, a number of
confidence-building measures had been introduced,
and India was keen to move forward purposefully in
normalizing relations with Pakistan. It was India’s firm
view that progress could only be made in an
atmosphere free of terrorism and violence or threats to
use them. India was also of the view that bilateral
relations should continue to be discussed bilaterally
and not raised in multilateral forums.
80. There was also a need to be vigilant against
voicing sentiments which were tantamount to
supporting terrorists who sought to destabilize a long-
established democratic and plural society. India did not
therefore consider the sentiments articulated by the
delegation of Pakistan to be helpful, as they had the
potential to vitiate an atmosphere which had been
painstakingly created in the four rounds of the
Composite Dialogue held so far.
81. Mr. Hayee (Pakistan), speaking in exercise of the
right of reply, said that he had been surprised to hear
the comments made by the delegation of India
regarding terrorism. Pakistan was committed to the
elimination of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, but also held the position that the
legitimate struggles of a people for self-determination
could not be equated with terrorism. Pakistan therefore
continued to support the legitimate and legal struggle
of the Kashmiri people for self-determination.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.