United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.41
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
7 January 2013
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-59799 (E)
*1259799*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 41st meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 20 November 2012, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly
on Ageing (continued)
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights:
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)A/C.3/67/SR.41
12-59799 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(a) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued)
(b) Follow-up to the International Year of Older
Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing
(continued) (A/C.3/67/L.9/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.9/Rev.1: Towards a
comprehensive and integral international legal
instrument to promote and protect the rights
and dignity of older persons
1. Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador), introducing
draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.9/Rev.1 on behalf of the
sponsors, said that the global demographic situation had
changed dramatically over the preceding fifty years.
While reaching old age had previously been
uncommon, now there was constant growth among
persons reaching 60 years of age, with the sharpest
growth among persons over 80. Consequently, it was
important to establish a mechanism and legal provisions
to empower older persons, protect their rights and
dignity and ensure that they received due care.
2. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Guatemala, Paraguay, Mali and Cuba had joined
the list of sponsors.
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.61)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.61: Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa
3. Ms. Farngalo (Liberia), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.61 on behalf of the African
Group, said that the draft resolution had been the
product of thorough consultations in Geneva, contained
technical updates and made reference to the recent
crises in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Mali and their impact on the Sahel Region.
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.55/Rev.1, A/C.3/67/L.57)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.55/Rev.1: Glorification
of Nazism: In admissibility of certain practices that
contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance
4. Mr. Nebenzi (Russian Federation), introducing
the draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.55/Rev.1, said that
Bangladesh, Benin, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania and Turkmenistan had joined
the list of sponsors. The events and ideologies of the
Second World War had been thoroughly documented,
yet there were still attempts to rewrite history. He
deplored the rise and acts of violence of skinhead and
neo-Nazi groups, which drew their inspiration from
ideologies that the United Nations had been established
to counter. Increasingly, monuments to the Nazis were
being unveiled, anniversaries of emancipation from
Nazi rule were being declared days of mourning and
persons opposed to forgetting those who had struggled
against Nazism were being arrested. Moreover, there
had recently been advertisements exploiting the
suffering of the victims of Nazism. The sponsors of the
draft resolution considered it entirely unacceptable that
those involved in the crimes of Nazism should be
glorified or that they should have their culpability
minimized, as had occurred in the case of some former
members of the SS, declared by the Nuremberg
Tribunal to be a criminal organization.
5. However, the intention of the draft resolution was
not to draw the General Assembly’s attention to the
past, but to current and highly dangerous forms of
racism that must be countered nationally and
internationally. Consequently, it had included a
provision emphasizing the importance of international
cooperation. The sponsors called on all Member States
who had voted against or abstained from voting on
previous versions of the draft resolution to reconsider
their position and give it the broadest possible support.
6. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Equatorial Guinea and South Sudan had joined the
list of sponsors.A/C.3/67/SR.41
3 12-59799
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.57:
International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
7. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
8. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Belarus, Benin, Chile,
Croatia, Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Iceland,
Italy, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Mali,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, Panama, the Republic of Moldova, San
Marino, Senegal, South Sudan, Thailand and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had joined the
list of sponsors.
9. Mr. Minsier (Belgium), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.57 on behalf of the sponsors,
said that the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Brazil, China, Japan, the Dominican
Republic, Liberia, Azerbaijan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Ukraine, India, the Republic of Korea,
Equatorial Guinea, Kyrgyzstan, Côte d’Ivoire,
Nicaragua, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Ecuador
and Honduras had joined the list of sponsors.
10. Following consultations with interested
delegations, he wished to introduce oral revisions to
the text of draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.57. In the tenth
preambular paragraph, the last part of the sentence,
which read “which highlights the challenges faced by
the human rights treaty bodies”, should be deleted. The
revised paragraph should read: “Taking note of the
report of the Secretary-General on measures to improve
further the effectiveness, harmonization and reform of
the treaty body system and taking note also of the
report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the strengthening of the human rights
treaty bodies,”. A new eleventh preambular paragraph
must be added, which should read: “Recalling
resolutions 66/254 of 23 February 2012 and 66/295 of
17 September 2012 on the intergovernmental process on
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system,”.
11. Operative paragraph 15 must be deleted and
replaced with the following revised version of
operative paragraph 15, which should read: “Welcomes
the efforts made by the Committee to erase the backlog
of reports pending consideration, and notes the role
that improvements in efficient working methods and
temporary additional meeting time have played in that
regard;”.
12. The resolution addressed several areas which
were key to the implementation of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, thus it was important that the General
Assembly was united in its support, including by
reiterating its call for universal ratification and
addressing some of the short- and long-term challenges
faced by the Committee. In that regard, the draft
resolution as orally revised reflected the crucial role of
the Convention in the fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
13. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Jordan and Timor-Leste had joined the list of
sponsors.
14. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.57, as orally revised,
was adopted.
15. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that the
United States strongly condemned racial discrimination
and strived for its eradication through United Nations
forums and in other contexts. It strongly supported the
goals of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
appreciated the work of the Committee to those ends.
16. Regarding the draft resolution, the United States
had not ratified the amendment to the Convention
referred to in the eighth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 19 concerning the financing of the
Committee. In terms of operative paragraphs 15 and 16,
the United States was pleased that the Committee had
been able to erase the backlog of reports pending
consideration and strongly supported efforts to increase
the efficiency of treaty bodies and improve working
methods so as to ensure effective use of resources.
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.56)
Draft resolution (A/C.3/67/L.56): Global efforts for the
total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
17. Mr. Yahiaoui (Algeria), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.56 on behalf of the Group of 77A/C.3/67/SR.41
12-59799 4
and China, said that the follow-up to the
implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action had always been at the centre of
the fight against racism and related forms of intolerance.
In recent times, the scourge had manifested itself
through new and modern technologies and acquired a
global nature. Consequently, the international
community needed to reaffirm its commitment and
political will to eradicate racism nationally, regionally
and internationally and to address all pertinent aspects
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.
The Group welcomed the work of the Durban follow-
up mechanisms, but stressed the need for greater
funding and participation. The Group also emphasized
the important role that sport and sport’s governing
bodies had to play in the fight against the scourge.
18. The key objective of the draft resolution was the
proclamation of 2013-2022 as the Decade for People of
African Descent. In that regard, the Group thanked the
Working Group of Experts on People of African
Descent for its work to develop a programme of action
for adoption by the Human Rights Council.
19. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Dominican Republic had joined the list of
sponsors.
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to
self-determination (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.58)
Draft resolution (A/C.3/67/L.58): Use of mercenaries
as a means of violating human rights and impeding
the exercise of the rights of peoples to
self-determination
20. Mr Amoros Nuñez (Cuba), introducing
resolution A/C.3/67/L.58, said that Algeria, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Burundi, China,
the Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Ecuador, Ethiopia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Nicaragua, the Russian Federation, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Swaziland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Benin and Zimbabwe had
joined the list of sponsors.
21. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, South Sudan, India and Senegal had joined the
list of sponsors.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection
of human rights:
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.35,
A/C.3/67/L.46, A/C.3/67/L.48, A/C.3/67/L.28,
A/C.3/67/L.34/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.35: Committee on the
Rights of the Child
22. Mrs. Ponikvar (Slovenia) said that Argentina,
Benin, Chile, Croatia, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Iceland, Italy,
Jordan, Kenya, Malawi, Montenegro, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Sweden, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Uruguay had
joined the list of sponsors. The Committee on the
Rights of the Child was facing an urgent crisis with a
rising backlog of work owing to the large number of
reports it received and its almost universal
membership. The draft resolution provided solutions
which had already been used to some success in 2008
and 2010, but they had been unable to reduce the
backlog. Consequently, the situation was now worse
and required urgent action if the Committee was to
continue pursuing its work without losing its relevance.
23. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Armenia, the Republic of Korea, Côte d’Ivoire,
Zambia, South Sudan, Hungary, Belgium, Mali,
Turkey, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Namibia had joined the list of
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.46: Missing persons
24. Mr Mikayilli (Azerbaijan) said that Argentina,
Benin, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Guatemala, Israel, Kazakhstan, Madagascar, Nigeria,
Panama, Saudi Arabia, Somalia and Uganda had joined
the list of sponsors. The draft resolution was based on
General Assembly resolution 65/120 and the relevant
resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights and
Human Rights Council. It had been updated to reflect
the Secretary General’s report on missing persons
(A/67/150) and the report of the Advisory Committee
of the Human Rights Council on best practices in the
matter of missing persons (A/HRC/16/70).A/C.3/67/SR.41
5 12-59799
25. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, South Sudan, Albania,
Armenia, Georgia, Tunisia and Senegal had joined the
list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.48: Freedom of Religion
or Belief
26. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), introducing the
draft resolution and speaking on behalf of the
European Union and sponsors, said that Australia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iceland, Norway and San
Marino had joined the list of sponsors. Defending
freedom of religion or belief and countering such
intolerance was a priority of European Union human
rights policy. The resolution was in line with that
commitment, which had been confirmed at the highest
political level. The adoption of the resolution would
send a strong collective message to the world.
27. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Armenia, South Sudan, Georgia, the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea, Mali, the Dominican Republic,
Monaco, Senegal and Burundi had joined the list of
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.28: The role of the
Ombudsman, mediator and other national human
rights institutions in the promotion and protection of
human rights
28. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
29. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Andorra, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Georgia, Guatemala, Japan,
Latvia, Madagascar, Mali, Montenegro, New Zealand,
Peru, the Republic of Moldova, Senegal, Serbia,
Slovakia, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates and the United States of America had joined
the list of sponsors.
30. Mr. El Mkhantar (Morocco), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.28) said that Australia, Gabon,
Israel, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), India,
Mongolia and Sudan had joined the list of sponsors.
The draft resolution was the outcome of a collective
endeavour reflecting the shared determination to
overcome differences and present a single, united front
when promoting and protecting human rights. The draft
resolution recognized the importance of the
Ombudsman, mediator and other human rights
institutions in building the rule of law, enhancing good
governance and promoting values of justice, equality
and respect for human dignity. It offered mediation
institutions the legislative framework and funding that
would allow them to implement their mandate in an
impartial and independent fashion and continue to
promote and protect human rights.
31. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Papua New Guinea,
Argentina, Armenia, South Sudan, Lebanon, the
Republic of Korea, Azerbaijan, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Belize, Malta, Mauritania, Uruguay, Ukraine
and Burundi had joined the list of sponsors.
32. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.28 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.34/Rev.1: Human rights
in the Administration of Justice
33. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
making a statement, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, on the
programme budget implications of operative paragraph 31
of the draft resolution, said that it was anticipated that
the request contained therein for documentation would
constitute an addition to the documentation workload
of one document of 8,500 words in all six languages.
That would entail additional requirements in the
amount of $50,900 for documentation services in 2013.
34. No provision had been included under the
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 for the
activities and, as such, additional allocation of funds
would be required. Accordingly, should the General
Assembly adopt the draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.34,
additional requirements of $50,900 would arise under
section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council affairs and conference management of the
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013.
However, all possible efforts would be made to absorb
the additional requirements of $50,900 within the
existing resources under section 2 and to report thereon
in the context of the second performance report for the
biennium 2012-2013.
35. Mr. Vollmer (Austria) said that Belarus, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Honduras, India,
Mongolia, Morocco, the Republic of Korea and
Ukraine had joined the list of sponsors. States had clear
human rights obligations regarding the administrationA/C.3/67/SR.41
12-59799 6
of justice. Individuals were at their most vulnerable
when facing criminal justice and needed protection in
the defence of their rights. The draft resolution focused
on two of the most vulnerable population groups:
persons deprived of their liberty and children and
juveniles within the justice system. As the report
requested under the resolution was to be presented one
year earlier than previously planned, the sponsors
hoped the Secretariat would be able to absorb the cost
as it would not subsequently have to prepare the report
in 2014.
36. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Philippines and Mali had joined the list of
sponsors.
37. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.34/Rev.1 was adopted.
38. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that the
United States was pleased to join consensus on the
resolution and reaffirm the importance of ensuring
respect for the rule of law and human rights in the
administration of justice. The United States welcomed
the continued focus on efforts relating to women and
children in the justice system and was committed to the
idea that States should address the vulnerability of
women, juveniles and children to violence, abuse and
injustice and to the importance of integrating issues
concerning women, juveniles and children into legal
provisions and processes. She was grateful to the
sponsors for incorporating several of her country’s
suggestions into the text. However, the United States
had been unable to sponsor the resolution as it called
on States to comply with various principles and
obligations that the United States had not undertaken.
The obligations were not imposed under international
law and were instead treaty-based obligations.
Consequently, such obligations were implemented to
the extent that States had accepted them. The
resolution, unlike its predecessors, had requested the
Secretary-General to prepare a report for the following
session of the General Assembly. Given the economic
situation and consequent financial constraints, the
United States hoped that the Secretariat would be able
to absorb the modest cost of the report.
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.59)
Draft resolution (A/C.3/67/L.59): Report of the
Human Rights Council
39. The Chair said the draft resolution contained no
programme budget implications.
40. Mr. Mendonça (Cape Verde), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.59 on behalf of the African
Group, said that the Human Rights Council had been a
key actor in laying suitable foundations to overcome
obstacles impeding international efforts to promote
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Its
constructive, cooperative approach to human rights
questions and provision of advice and necessary
technical and financial support at the request of national
governments had been instrumental in protecting the
human rights of citizens. Thus, the African Group
looked forward to the adoption by consensus of the
draft resolution which took note of the report of the
Human Rights Council, containing recommendations
on matters of the utmost importance to the Group,
including human trafficking, migrants and combating
contemporary forms of slavery, racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance. In
addition, the Group requested an editorial change to the
final paragraph, so that it became operative paragraph 1,
in accordance with the draft submitted by the Group.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.