United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.45
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
16 January 2008
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-59986 (E)
*0759986*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 45th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 15 November 2007, at 10.20 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.45
07-59986 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.29,
A/C.3/62/L.78 to L.81)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29: Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty
1. The Chairman drew attention to the proposed
amendments to the draft resolution contained in
documents A/C.3/62/L.78 to 81, which had no
programme budget implications. A recorded vote had
been requested on each amendment.
2. Mr. Degia (Barbados), introducing the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.78, said that the language of
paragraph 2 (a) of the draft resolution was too harsh
and implied that States maintaining the death penalty
did not respect international standards. The proposed
amendment was intended to introduce more
conciliatory language.
3. Mr. Llanos (Chile), speaking in explanation of
the vote before the voting, said that the sponsors of the
draft resolution wished to safeguard the rights of those
condemned to death; the proposed amendment would
weaken their protection. His delegation would
therefore vote against it.
4. Mr. Ebner (Austria), speaking in explanation of
the vote before the voting, said that the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the annex
to Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/50
clearly specified that capital punishment was a human
rights issue. Merely “taking into account” those
international standards would be inappropriate and
deny persons facing the death penalty their basic
human rights.
5. With respect to paragraph 2, “encourage” would
considerably weaken the language of the draft
resolution. For both those reasons, his delegation
would vote against the proposed amendment.
6. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment contained in document A/C.3/62/L.78.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Central African
Republic, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Niger,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bhutan, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji,
Ghana, Guatemala, Indonesia, Kenya, Mali,
Morocco, Nigeria, Republic of Korea, Russian
Federation, Sri Lanka, United States of America,
Zambia.A/C.3/62/SR.45
3 07-59986
7. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.78
was rejected by 78 votes to 66, with 17 abstentions.*
8. Mr. Degia (Barbados) said that the proposed
amendment had not been intended to show disrespect
for international standards but to introduce more
conciliatory language.
9. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that his delegation had
voted in favour of the proposed amendment because
paragraph 2 (a) referred to an Economic and Social
Council resolution, and not to a General Assembly
resolution. It was the norm, in the Third Committee, to
take account of resolutions adopted by bodies of a
limited membership.
10. Mr. Degia (Barbados), introducing the
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.79, said that it was
unclear why Governments were being asked, under
paragraph 2 (b), to provide the Secretary-General with
information on the use of capital punishment. It was
more appropriate, in an open society, to make
information with regard to the imposition of the death
penalty available to the public.
11. Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
observance of safeguards guaranteeing the rights of
those facing the death penalty was the main objective
of the annex to Economic and Social Council
resolution 1984/50, which stated, inter alia, that capital
punishment should be carried out pursuant to
a final judgement rendered by a competent court after
due process and inflict the minimum possible suffering.
It was therefore only natural that States should provide
information to the Secretary-General regarding the
implementation of that resolution. His delegation
would vote against the proposed amendment.
12. Mr. Davide (Philippines), speaking in
explanation of the vote before the voting, said that the
United Nations was the most appropriate venue for
discussion of capital punishment and to receive
information relating to the safeguards protecting the
rights of those facing the death penalty. His delegation
would vote against the proposed amendment because it
would be left to the discretion of the Member States to
provide information, which was unacceptable.
13. Mr. Tarragô (Brazil), speaking in explanation of
the vote before the voting, said that paragraph 2 (b) of
the draft resolution was intended to allow the
Secretary-General to assess implementation of
Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/50,
thereby relying on information from Member States.
The proposed amendment did not reflect the usual
language; his delegation would vote against it.
14. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.79.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada,
Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Nauru, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
States of America, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa,
* The delegation of the Czech Republic subsequently
informed the Committee that it had intended to vote
against the proposed amendment.A/C.3/62/SR.45
07-59986 4
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bhutan, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji,
Ghana, Guatemala, Japan, Kenya, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Mali, Mongolia, Morocco,
Nigeria, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, Zambia.
15. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.79
was rejected by 82 votes to 59, with 19 abstentions.
16. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana) said that the proposed
amendment had defended the concept of territorial
integrity. The sponsors of the draft resolution had
disregarded any criticism of the text, refusing to
discuss it during the informal meetings, and he was
disappointed with the result of the voting.
17. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that paragraph 2 (b) gave
the Secretary-General the right to supervise Member
States, which was not his role. For this reason his
delegation had voted for the proposed amendment.
18. Mr. Degia (Barbados), introducing the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.80, said that paragraph 2 (c)
of the draft resolution was overly prescriptive and not
in conformity with the language of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
19. Ms. Cross (United Kingdom), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/62/L.80 had not been presented during the
informal discussions and, as such, should be
considered as an attempt to change the object and
purpose of the draft resolution.
20. Paragraph 2 (c) of the draft resolution implied
that a step-by-step approach to the abolition of the
death penalty could be achieved by restricting its use
or reducing the number of offences for which it was
imposed, in line with international standards. Her
delegation would vote against the proposed
amendment.
21. Mr. Davide (Philippines), speaking in
explanation of the vote before the voting, said that the
proposed amendment did not address the progressive
approach towards abolishing the death penalty
contained in a number of General Assembly
resolutions, and was contrary to the letter and spirit of
the draft resolution. His delegation would vote against
it.
22. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.80.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Central African
Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United States of America, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,A/C.3/62/SR.45
5 07-59986
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bhutan, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji,
Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon, Mali,
Morocco, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka,
Turkmenistan, Zambia.
23. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.80
was rejected by 83 votes to 68, with 15 abstentions.
24. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that although the
proposed amendment might have changed the purpose
of the draft resolution, it was in line with the meaning
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. Paragraph 2 (c) of the draft resolution was
attempting to change Member States’ legal obligations.
25. Mr. Degia (Barbados), introducing the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained
in document A/C.3/62/L.81, said that there was no
international consensus on the death penalty. The
sponsors of the draft resolution were trying to impose
their set of values on other countries, with no respect
for their sovereignty or integrity. The proposed
amendment reflected the spirit of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which did not
rule out the death penalty for the most serious crimes.
Pressure was being put on the group of countries
opposed to the draft resolution, even going as far as to
threaten the withdrawal of aid.
26. Mr. Makanga (Gabon), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that the proposed
amendment was contradictory. Paragraph 2 (d) was in
accordance with the title of the draft resolution, which
set out to impose a moratorium on the use of the death
penalty. Restricting crimes for which the death penalty
might be imposed would be contrary to the thrust of
the draft resolution; for that reason his delegation
would vote against the proposed amendment.
27. Mr. Davide (Philippines), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
proposed amendment under discussion duplicated the
proposed amendment contained in document
A/C.3/62/L.71, which had already been rejected.
Paragraph 2 (d) was at the very heart of the resolution
and in keeping with the spirit of the Covenant.
Furthermore, it did not impose a deadline on Member
States. It merely set out to defeat the very principles of
the draft resolution, and for that reason his delegation
would vote against it.
28. Mr. Vandeville (France), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting and as a sponsor of the draft
resolution, said that General Assembly resolutions
2857 (XXVI) and 32/61 had already called for the
progressive restriction of offences for which the death
penalty might be imposed, with a view to its abolition.
The sponsors of the resolution had originally sought to
introduce a resolution abolishing the death penalty but
had reached a compromise during preliminary
consultations to restrict the wording to a moratorium.
He therefore considered that the proposed amendment
was not in keeping with the spirit and letter of the draft
resolution. Contrary to what a number of speakers had
inferred, the sponsors had been respectful of the views
of others and had included the concept of gradually
introducing a moratorium in order to reflect their
views. His delegation would vote against the proposed
amendment.
29. A recorded vote was taken on the amendment to
draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document
A/C.3/62/L.81.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.A/C.3/62/SR.45
07-59986 6
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Benin,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zambia.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bhutan, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala,
Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia, Mali, Morocco,
Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, Viet Nam.
30. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 contained in document A/C.3/62/L.81
was rejected by 86 votes to 67, with 17 abstentions.
31. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana) said that he regretted
that the proposed amendment had been rejected, since
it emphasized his own delegation’s position that the
death penalty was limited to the most serious crimes.
32. Mr. Degia (Barbados) said that he was
disappointed by the outcome of the vote. The
representative of France had implied that the sponsors
of the amendment wanted to impose their own views
on others, yet any call for a moratorium or abolition
was surely an imposition on those States that chose to
retain the death penalty, as was the threat by certain
countries to withdraw aid.
33. Mr. Khani Fooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran)
said that 15 States had been absent, so it could be
argued that 99 States (67+17+15) had not in fact
rejected the proposed amendment.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29: Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty
34. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) proposed an oral
amendment in a spirit of constructive engagement, that
consideration of the matter should be resumed at the
sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly, since
the international community was evidently no closer to
achieving consensus on the issue. In paragraph 5, the
words “sixty-third” would therefore be replaced with
the words “sixty-seven”.
35. Ms. Malinovska (Latvia) requested a vote to
reject the proposed oral amendment, which her
delegation considered to be inconsistent with the need
for ongoing, open and transparent dialogue on
the issue.
36. Mr. Menon (Singapore), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, supported by Mr. Khani
Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran), Ms. Bowen
(Jamaica), Mr. Degia (Barbados), Mr. Bart (Saint
Kitts and Nevis), Mr. Al-Saif (Kuwait), Ms. Mndebele
(Swaziland), Mr. Strigelsky (Belarus), Mr. Hetanang
(Botswana) and Mr. Sergiwa (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya), said that the debate over the past two days
had demonstrated that the matter was highly
controversial and divisive, with many States
maintaining that it was a criminal justice issue.
Nothing would be gained from reopening the question
in one year’s time, since delegations’ positions would
not have changed. His delegation would thus vote in
favour of Malaysia’s proposed oral amendment; he
urged other delegations to follow suit.
37. Mr. Heller (Mexico) said that his delegation
would not be supporting Malaysia’s proposed
amendment, since some States would only maintain the
same position in five years’ time.
38. Mr. Davide (Philippines), supported by
Mr. Makanga (Gabon), said any postponement would
only defeat the objectives of the draft resolution, since
more people would be subjected to the death penalty inA/C.3/62/SR.45
7 07-59986
the interim. The proposed amendment would render
paragraph 4 meaningless.
39. Mr. Ould Ahmed Tolba (Mauritania) said that he
supported Malaysia’s proposed amendment, since it
would allow the abolitionists more time to consider the
positions of those States who remained in favour of the
death penalty.
40. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that it would be a waste
of the Organization’s resources to resume such a
divisive debate each year. Countries needed time to go
through their own due process. They would not
currently be in any position to respond to a call for a
moratorium. He thus supported the
proposed amendment.
41. Mr. Nikulski (The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia), supported by Mr. Xhaferras (Albania),
said that the United Nations should continue to be used
as a forum for open and constructive dialogue on the
issue under the current agenda item. Malaysia’s
proposal was contrary both to the spirit of the
Organization and the resolution itself.
42. Mr. Vandeville (France) urged States to reject the
proposed oral amendment, which was not as benign as
it appeared. The matter had been pending since 1971
and the international community could not afford to
wait another five years before calling for a moratorium.
At the request of the representative of Latvia, a
recorded vote was taken on the oral amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 proposed by the representative
of Malaysia.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Chad, China,
Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bhutan, Cambodia, Equatorial Guinea,
Ghana, Guatemala, Japan, Kenya, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique,
Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka,
Togo, Zambia.
44. The oral amendment proposed by the
representative of Malaysia was rejected by 84 votes to
68, with 19 abstentions.
45. Mr. Durdyev (Turkmenistan) said that his vote
had not been recorded. He had intended to vote against.
46. Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) said that his vote
had been incorrectly recorded. He had also intended to
vote against.
47. Following a procedural discussion in which
Ms. Banks (New Zealand), Mr. Heller (Mexico) and
Mr. Menon (Singapore) took part, Mr. Khane
(Secretary of the Committee) confirmed that the vote
remained valid, but that the clarifications made by theA/C.3/62/SR.45
07-59986 8
representatives of Turkmenistan and Luxembourg would
be noted.
48. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) wished to propose three oral
amendments to the draft resolution. A new operative
paragraph should be inserted following the current
operative paragraph 3. It would read “Urges Member
States to take all necessary measures to protect the
lives of unborn children”. The delegations of Bahrain,
Iran, Kuwait, Libya, Mauritania, Saudi Arabia and the
Sudan also sponsored that amendment.
49. A second new operative paragraph should
likewise be inserted following the current operative
paragraph 3. It would read “Reaffirms that every
human being has the inherent right to life and stresses
in this regard that abortion should only be admissible
in necessary cases, in particular where the life of the
mother and/or the child is at serious risk”. The
delegations of Bahrain, Iran, Kuwait, Libya, Saudi
Arabia and the Sudan also sponsored that amendment.
50. Respect for human dignity and the sanctity of life
were principles revered in Islam and indeed in all
religions and societies. He noted that the provisions of
article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights guaranteed the right to life, including
the right to life of the unborn child of a pregnant
woman condemned to the death penalty and regretted
that the draft resolution was selective and narrow in its
approach to the right to life, representing an attempt by
certain States to impose their views. His proposed
amendments took a different approach based on the
sanctity of all life, including the right to life of the
unborn. If the intent of the sponsors of the draft
resolution was truly to protect human life, they should
have no trouble accepting his amendments.
Accordingly, he also proposed that the title of the draft
resolution should be changed from “Moratorium on the
use of death penalty” to “Right to life”, and requested
that, in the case of a vote on his proposed amendments,
there should be a separate vote on each amendment, in
the order that they were put forward.
51. Ms. Maiera (Brazil) said that while a moratorium
on the use of the death penalty was certainly linked to
the issue of the right to life, the right to life itself was
not the main focus of the draft resolution. The oral
amendments proposed by the representative of Egypt
would change the focus of the draft resolution and
undermine its main message. Her delegation believed
that the issue of the right to life deserved full
consideration, but in a more appropriate context, and
therefore objected to the amendments, requested a
recorded vote on the amendments, and called on other
Member States to follow its example and vote
against them.
52. Mr. Davide (Philippines) said that his delegation
fully supported the right to life, including for the
unborn, and would support a separate resolution on that
issue. The proposed amendments were not, however,
germane to the subject of the draft resolution, were out
of order and should not therefore be considered.
53. Ms. Banks (New Zealand) said that the
amendments were intended to distract from the main
focus of a carefully balanced text. She also called for a
recorded vote on the proposed amendments. Her
delegation would vote against the amendments and she
urged all Member States to do likewise.
54. Mr. Meyer (Observer for the Holy See)
reaffirmed his delegation’s commitment to the right to
life at all stages of life. States had a duty to take a
consistent approach to the right to life and not reduce
that right to a political tool, and to protect all human
life, rather than choosing whose life truly had dignity
and worth.
55. Mr. Al-Saif (Kuwait) said that the very basis of
the draft resolution was respect for the right to life. His
delegation therefore supported the proposed
amendments, including changing the title of the draft
resolution, and called on all Member States to vote in
favour of the amendments.
56. Mr. Sergiwa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), stressing
the absolute nature of the right to life, including for
unborn children, wondered why the draft resolution
protected the right to life of criminals but not that of an
innocent unborn child. His delegation would vote in
favour of the proposed amendments and urged all
Member States to do likewise.
57. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran),
stressing that protection of the right to life was the
central purpose of the United Nations, welcomed in
particular the proposal to change the title of the draft
resolution. Although the current text of the draft
resolution represented a cross-regional consensus, it
did not fully reflect the views of all delegations. Time
considerations had prevented his delegation from
submitting a draft resolution dealing specifically with
the right to life, but he looked forward to taking up thatA/C.3/62/SR.45
9 07-59986
issue at the Committee’s next session in an
appropriate manner.
58. The Chairman said that a recorded vote had
been requested on the first amendment proposed by the
representative of Egypt.
59. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) stressed that the issue of the
right to life must be addressed in a comprehensive
rather than selective manner. The amendments
proposed by his delegation were perfectly in keeping
with, for example, the second preambular paragraph of
the text, and he called on all delegations to vote
in favour.
60. Ms. Molaroni (San Marino), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that while
her delegation respected the right to life at all stages
for all its citizens, including for the unborn, the
proposed amendment was not relevant to the subject
matter of the draft resolution and would alter its scope,
purpose and content. Her delegation would therefore
vote against the amendment.
61. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that his
delegation believed that the lives of the unborn must be
protected and would vote in favour of the first
proposed amendment. States opposing the death
penalty should at least be equally scrupulous in
showing concern for innocent life.
62. Mr. González (Costa Rica) said that his
delegation believed that respect for the right to life
began at the moment of conception; the right to life
was the basis for respect for human dignity and human
rights. Therefore, his delegation had become a sponsor
of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29. However, it would
vote against the amendment, which altered the scope
and purpose of the draft resolution.
63. Ms. Tomič (Slovenia) recalled that the draft
resolution was a cross-regional initiative. The proposed
amendments were an attempt to alter its main focus,
and her delegation called on all Member States to vote
against them.
64. Ms. Borjas Chávez (El Salvador) said that her
delegation, like the delegation of the Holy See,
believed in the right to life at all stages of life,
including from conception. The proposed amendment,
however, detracted from the focus of the draft
resolution and her delegation would vote against it.
65. Mr. Makanga (Gabon) said that the proposed
amendments dealt with the fundamental issue of the
right to life in general, a complex topic which could be
considered by the Committee. He encouraged the
Member States that supported the amendments to
prepare a draft resolution for the Committee’s next
session. The focus of the draft resolution was more
specific, however. His delegation would vote against
the amendments and called on other Member States to
do likewise.
66. Ms. Picco (Monaco) said that while her
delegation certainly supported the principle of the right
to life, the proposed amendments would detract from
and change the focus of the draft resolution.
67. Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) said that his
delegation supported the right to life, including from
conception. He regretted that an issue which warranted
comprehensive consideration by the Committee had
been introduced in a partisan manner in the context of
an unrelated draft resolution. He reiterated his
delegation’s belief that selective use was being made of
the provisions of certain international instruments
relating to the right to life, hindering objective and
consistent respect for that right. Accordingly, it would
abstain from the voting.
68. Mr. Hayee (Pakistan) said that the amendments
were perfectly relevant. In accordance with the spirit of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the draft
resolution called on Member States to take whatever
measures necessary to protect the lives of the unborn.
If respect for the right to life was truly the basis for the
draft resolution, there should be no problem affirming
in that text the right to life of the unborn. His
delegation would vote in favour of all the amendments.
69. Ms. Cerna (Honduras) said that her delegation
opposed abortion and supported the right to life. The
proposed amendments were not, however, relevant to
the draft resolution and her delegation would vote
against them.
70. Ms. Péan Mevs (Haiti) agreed that the right to
life was a fundamental right and applied to the unborn,
but that issue should be dealt with separately. The
amendments were not relevant to the focus of the draft
resolution and her delegation would vote against them.
71. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the
draft resolution took a selective approach to the right to
life; her delegation would vote in favour of theA/C.3/62/SR.45
07-59986 10
amendments proposed by the representative of Egypt
with a view to making the text more balanced.
72. Ms. Melon (Argentina) said that the draft
resolution dealt with a very specific concern of the
international community by calling for a moratorium
on the use of the death penalty with a view to
encouraging States to explore alternatives to that
punishment. The proposed amendments attempted to
broaden the scope of the draft resolution and her
delegation would vote against them.
73. Mr. Suárez (Colombia) said that his delegation
would look forward to considering a comprehensive
draft resolution on the right to life. The proposed
amendments were not, however, relevant to the subject
of the draft resolution. His delegation would therefore
abstain from the voting.
74. Mr. Llanos (Chile) said that, at the appropriate
time, his delegation would welcome a separate
resolution on and discussion of the right to life, which
was a fundamental human right. The proposed
amendments would, however, distract from the focus
of the current draft resolution and his delegation would
vote against them.
75. Mr. Peralta (Paraguay) said that while his
delegation fully supported the principle of right to life,
the amendments were not relevant to the main focus of
the draft resolution and his delegation would vote
against them.
76. Ms. Sánchez de Cruz (Dominican Republic) said
that her delegation was committed to respect for the
right to life, including from conception. The proposed
amendments were not, however, relevant to the draft
resolution and would detract from its main focus.
77. Ms. Moreira (Ecuador) said that the right to life,
including from conception, was an important element
in international human rights instruments, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Her delegation
would welcome discussion of that right with regard, for
example, to a draft resolution on the right to life. The
proposed amendments were not, however, pertinent to
the main focus of the current draft resolution and her
delegation would vote against them.
78. Ms. Morgan-Moss (Panama) said that her
delegation would vote against the proposed
amendments, which were not relevant to the main
focus of the draft resolution.
79. A recorded vote was taken on the first oral
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 proposed
by Egypt.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Bahrain, Botswana, Comoros,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tonga, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Chad, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nigeria,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Swaziland,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Viet Nam,
Zambia.A/C.3/62/SR.45
11 07-59986
80. The first oral amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29 was rejected by 83 votes to 28, with 47
abstentions.
81. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that his delegation was
disappointed at the result of the vote. Some delegations
had said that the amendment was not relevant, but they
themselves had made reference to other international
instruments dealing with the right to life.
82. The Chairman said that a recorded vote had
been requested on the second oral amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 proposed by Egypt.
83. Ms. Al-Shehail (Saudi Arabia), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
right to life included all stages of life; therefore, all
those who believed in human rights should join her
delegation in voting in favour of the amendment.
84. Mr. Al-Saif (Kuwait) said that his delegation
would vote in favour in order to give priority to the
right to life.
85. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that the inherent right to
life was well-established in the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Charter of the
United Nations, yet some States which were party to
those instruments were denying that fact. He urged
their delegations to reconsider their position.
86. Ms. Robles (Spain) said that the only purpose of
the amendment was to distort the real aim of the draft
resolution, the progressive elimination of the death
penalty. Therefore, her delegation would vote against
the amendment.
87. Mr. González (Costa Rica) said that his
delegation found the amendment irrelevant and would
vote against it.
88. Ms. Molaroni (San Marino) said that her
delegation agreed with the content of the amendment,
but would vote against it because it was not consistent
with the scope of the draft resolution.
89. Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) said that her delegation
would vote in favour of the amendment.
90. Ms. Borjas Chávez (El Salvador) said that her
delegation did not see the relevance of the amendment
and therefore would vote against it.
91. Mr. Suárez (Colombia) said that his delegation
did not believe the proposed amendment was relevant
and would abstain.
92. A recorded vote was taken on the second oral
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 proposed
by Egypt.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Botswana,
Comoros, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Chad, Colombia,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Dominica, Equatorial Guinea,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Malaysia,
Mali, Morocco, Nauru, Nigeria, Republic of
Korea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, United States of America, Viet Nam,
Zambia.A/C.3/62/SR.45
07-59986 12
93. The second proposed oral amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 was rejected by 84 votes to 26,
with 46 abstentions.
94. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that,
while his delegation agreed that the lives of the unborn
deserved the strongest possible protection and that
countries advocating abolition of the death penalty
ought to be willing to consider such protection, it had
abstained in the vote because the scope of the
amendment was broader than was necessary to address
those issues.
95. The Chairman urged the representative of Egypt
to withdraw his third proposed oral amendment.
96. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that, in the light of the
adamant stance among delegations, he would withdraw
his third amendment. He regretted that other
delegations did not understand that there were differing
perspectives on the right to life and wished that it had
been possible to submit a separate draft resolution on
that issue.
97. The third proposed oral amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 was withdrawn.
98. The Chairman invited the Committee to take
action on draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 as a whole.
99. Mr. Menon (Singapore), referring to rule 129 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, moved
that draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 should be adopted
paragraph by paragraph.
100. Mr. Davide (Philippines) moved to oppose the
motion by the representative of Singapore. It was
plainly dilatory: delegations had been given ample
opportunity to make statements and propose
amendments to the draft resolution, all of which had
thus far been rejected, and it would be divisive.
101. Mr. Heller (Mexico) and Ms. Banks (New
Zealand), speaking in support of the motion to oppose
division, said that their delegations favoured voting on
the draft resolution as a whole.
102. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), speaking against the motion
to oppose division, said that preventing others from
expressing their views was against the principles of
human rights and could be seen as coercive.
103. Mr. Degia (Barbados), speaking against the
motion to oppose division, said that voting on the
paragraphs of the draft resolution would allow for the
free expression of a diversity of views, which should
be given tolerance. Further, some of the sponsors of the
draft resolution had requested votes on individual
paragraphs of other draft resolutions, which indicated
that a double standard was being applied.
104. A recorded vote was taken on the motion to
oppose division made by the representative of the
Philippines under rule 129 of the rules of procedure.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Against:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United RepublicA/C.3/62/SR.45
13 07-59986
of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Cambodia, Chad, Equatorial Guinea,
Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Kenya, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Morocco, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka,
Swaziland, Togo, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United
States of America, Zambia.
105. The motion to oppose division was adopted by 86
votes to 62, with 23 abstentions.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.