United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.5
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
19 November 2009
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-55418 (E)
*0955418*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 5th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 7 October 2009, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 104: Crime prevention and criminal justice*
Agenda item 105: Drug control*
* Items which the Committee has decided to consider together.A/C.3/64/SR.5
09-55418 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 104: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (A/64/99, A/64/121, A/64/123, A/64/130,
A/64/227-S/2009/402, A/C.3/64/L.2)
Agenda item 105: Drug control (A/64/120, A/64/92-
E/2009/98)
Statement by the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
1. Mr. Costa (Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)) recalled
that Member States had had the foresight 10 years earlier
to reinforce their collective effort against drugs,
transnational organized crime and terrorism, holding a
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
narcotics, signing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, and adopting
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) creating the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, followed
by resolutions 1368 (2001) and 1373 (2001) to
reinforce the multilateral response to international
terrorism. The results, he noted, had been mixed, but
the drug problem could still be contained by improving
health, re-establishing justice and enforcing security
against terror. To do so, however, Member States of the
United Nations and all other stakeholders would need
to show real determination and forge alliances.
2. Faced with the sinister triad of drugs, crime and
terrorism, UNODC was working to promote the
virtuous trio of health, justice and security. At its
instigation, the United Nations system was now
redirecting its drug control activities towards
promoting health. According to the policy statement
adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in
March 2009, an integrated and balanced strategy must
be pursued to combat the worldwide drug problem, and
the Office was cooperating with the World Health
Organization (WHO) to improve treatment for drug
users, especially in developing countries, so as to
reduce demand. It was also cooperating with
Governments and local authorities to facilitate the
social integration of marginalized groups, encourage
the decriminalization of drug abuse, and support
improved treatment for imprisoned drug addicts in
order to halt the spread of HIV.
3. On the supply side, the Office was supporting
alternative development programmes in countries that
produced opium, cocaine and cannabis, contributing in
this way to economic growth and security in poor regions
of the world. However, with drug-related crimes
threatening to destabilize the entire world, legalization
was not a viable solution, for it risked exacerbating the
problem and sparking a social and humanitarian
catastrophe, particularly in developing countries. In fact,
not a single Member State had proposed such an option.
4. UNODC was therefore encouraging the
prevention and treatment of drug addiction, and was
using its expertise to help Member States combat drug-
related crime. It was working as well with various
agencies to implement regional action plans against drugs
and crime in Africa, in the Americas and in Europe, and it
had provided support for the establishment of regional
information centres in Central Asia and in the Gulf
region, as well as for the trilateral initiative associating
Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan.
5. UNODC was committed to security and justice
for all, and had made the struggle against organized
crime one of its priority fields of intervention,
recognizing that this form of crime now had a
worldwide and macroeconomic dimension and
represented a threat so severe that it had been the
subject of several debates in the Security Council.
Criminals were attracted to regions of the world beset
by insecurity, conflict and corruption. Security and
development were therefore essential and must go
hand-in-hand with the establishment of justice. For this
reason, the Office was cooperating with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations
Secretariat to consolidate the rule of law in such
countries as the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone, and was
helping to strengthen judicial capacities for combating
piracy, terrorism and the various forms of transit
trafficking in the Horn of Africa. It was also planning
to tackle the links between the criminal underground
and the business world, by helping to improve the
techniques for combating money-laundering and
identity theft and, in general, to promote judicial
integrity with a view to reducing corruption.
6. Better use could be made of the United Nations
Conventions against Transnational Organized Crime
and against Corruption. With respect to the latter
instrument, Member States should also take the
opportunity of the Conference of States Parties,
scheduled for Doha in November 2009, to define a
mechanism for monitoring its enforcement, and theyA/C.3/64/SR.5
3 09-55418
should call upon the expertise of the Office for taking
all the measures mentioned in that treaty.
7. The United Nations continued to give great
importance to these problems, and the international
community now had the means to deal with them more
effectively. On this point, the World Drug Report
offered an overview of the situation and the impact that
crime was having on development in several regions of
the world. A world crime report would also be released
shortly. In addition, the Office had reinforced its
capacities, extended its scope of action, and forged
partnerships with other United Nations agencies, regional
organizations, international financial institutions, and
civil society.
8. It must be noted that the Office, with a budget
representing only 1 per cent of the United Nations
ordinary budget, was encountering difficulties in
carrying out its mission, because of inadequate funds.
Member States should try to remedy this problem and
take full advantage of all the resources and specialized
expertise of the Office for dealing with these three
scourges that continue to threaten humanity.
9. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) asked for details on the
UNODC role in combating money-laundering, with
respect in particular to capacity-building, and on steps
taken to coordinate its activities with those of other
institutions concerned, such as the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, so as to avoid
duplication of efforts.
10. Mr. Amangona (Côte d’Ivoire) referred to the
letter of 28 July 2009 sent to the Secretary-General by
the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United
Nations (A/64/227-S/2009/402) reporting that chemical
precursors used in the manufacture of explosives and
narcotics and originating in Côte d’Ivoire had entered
Guinean territory. Astonished at this accusation, he
wanted to assure the international community that Côte
d’Ivoire was not engaged in any way in such trade. In
fact it was itself the victim of the illegal dumping of
toxic products on its territory, it was combating the
traffic in drugs and illicit substances, and it could
never be a staging point for this kind of traffic toward
friendly countries. It reserved the right, after an
investigation, to report to the General Assembly on
how that document should be dealt with.
11. Mr. Vimal (India) asked what importance
UNODC attached to promoting alternative livelihoods
in regions where people lived primarily from crops
used to produce drugs, and what funding the Office had
available for this activity. He also wanted to know the
Office’s priorities and he asked for clarification on the
priority it seemed to be giving to treating drug abuse
rather than combating drug production. He also wondered
what effects the economic and financial crisis was having
on the Office’s financing and activities.
12. Mrs. Sulimani (Sierra Leone) mentioned the
considerable efforts that her country, just emerging
from a conflict, was making to combat organized
transnational crime, and drug trafficking in particular.
13. Mr. Tarar (Pakistan) asked whether, despite its
financial troubles, UNODC was planning to update the
tools and manuals it supplied to Member States.
14. Mrs. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) pointed to
the difficulties her country was facing, as a country of
transit, in securing the necessary funds to combat
human trafficking, terrorism and illegal immigration,
and wondered what solutions might be envisaged.
15. Mr. Costa (Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)),
responding to the question posed by the representative
of Malaysia, explained that money-laundering had been
conducted on a small scale until the 1980s and had
been used to recycle cash, but it had then come to be
conducted through financial institutions as well. The
Financial Action Task Force on Money-Laundering
(FATF), which was created at that time, had succeeded
in curbing the recycling of dirty money through the
banking system, and money-laundering had now
reverted to its initial method. Thus, several States had
recently impounded large sums of cash originating
from drug trafficking. The financial crisis had allowed
organized crime to penetrate the financial system once
again, injecting liquidity into it. UNODC was
examining the various forms of money-laundering and
was attempting to avoid duplicating the efforts of other
institutions concerned.
16. Responding to the statement of the representative
of Côte d’Ivoire, the Executive Director said he was
unaware that Côte d’Ivoire was suspected of being the
source of the chemical precursors used in other countries
of West Africa. Confirming the presence of clandestine
laboratories in the Republic of Guinea, he said he was
ready to discuss this matter with representatives of Côte
d’Ivoire and the other countries of the coastal region of
West Africa, and added that the Security Council would
be devoting a session to this matter in early November.A/C.3/64/SR.5
09-55418 4
17. In response to the question raised by the
representative of India, the Executive Director agreed
that it was very important to find alternative
livelihoods to replace the crops used to produce drugs,
particularly since they were found in poor countries.
The situation was not everywhere the same, however,
and the measures adopted must be properly tailored. In
effect, the market could respond either to demand or to
supply. In Afghanistan, it was determined by supply, in
the sense that that country produced twice as much
opium as the world consumed. On the other hand, in
Andean countries the market was ruled by demand. In
Afghanistan and in Colombia, UNODC was supporting
farmers who decided to turn to legitimate crops, by
helping them to market their products and contributing
to the establishment of infrastructure facilities. The
results in Afghanistan were indeed encouraging, for
wheat production was now taking over land from
opium. With respect to the financing of the Office, the
voluntary contributions on which it relied in part had
risen by 50 per cent since 2002, but were still hostage
to the priorities of donors. Moreover, the Office lacked
the funds to carry out its basic activities. It would be
well if Member States were to remedy this problem,
which was making the Office particularly vulnerable.
18. Responding to the observation by the representative
of Sierra Leone, the Executive Director expressed his
admiration for the efforts made by that country to combat
drug trafficking, and mentioned the role played by the
representative of the Secretary-General in Sierra
Leone, while noting that the Office conducted its
programmes at the regional rather than national level.
19. In response to the intervention of the representative
of Pakistan, the Executive Director recalled that that
country, which was not a drugs producer, was a country of
transit for opium and its derivatives, heroin and morphine,
coming from Afghanistan. Referring to the technical
tools and manuals prepared by the Office, he agreed
that they were quickly becoming obsolete, but he
pointed out that the Office’s financing problems had no
impact here, as it was for basic activities, in particular
field monitoring, that funds were lacking, and not for
project execution. In addition, the Office was in
contact at the ministerial level with Pakistan,
Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran with a
view to implementing trilateral cooperation to prevent
the trafficking of drugs that were produced in
Afghanistan and that transited through the other two
countries; these efforts appeared to be bearing fruit.
20. Responding to the intervention of the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Executive Director
confirmed that that country was a country of transit but
fortunately, as was the case with many other Arab
countries of transit, it had virtually no drug addicts. He
noted that the Office was helping countries in the region
to combat transit traffic. Thanks to financing provided by
countries neighbouring the Syrian Arab Republic,
UNODC had been able to open an office in Cairo,
covering the entire region, a subregional office in the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya covering the countries of the
Maghreb, and another in the Gulf region. UNODC
intended henceforth to focus its efforts on the Middle
East, the third facet of the very complex programme it
was pursuing in the region.
21. Mr. Vimal (India) asked the Executive Director
to give further details on the World Crime Report he
had mentioned in his statement, indicating in particular
what types of crime would be examined, whether the
report would contain rankings, and whether it would
address narcoterrorism.
22. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin), reacting to the
Executive Director’s response to the representative of
Côte d’Ivoire, asked whether there might be duplicity on
the part of the authorities of some countries that earned
revenues from drug crops, and he noted that those were
sometimes traditional crops that countries could not do
without. He wondered therefore what solutions might
be envisaged. As well, he said, there were confirmed
links between drug traffickers, money-laundering and
election financing. He wanted to know what difficulties
these problems were posing for the Office.
23. Mr. Mosoti (Kenya) expressed his country’s
satisfaction with the work of UNODC and its
collaboration with Kenya, especially on the question of
witness protection, crime control, and capacity-building.
He noted that the region was host to a great many
refugees from Somalia, and a theatre for small arms
trafficking and piracy. He asked for details on UNODC
activities in this area, and wanted as well to hear the
Office’s recommendations on decriminalizing drug abuse,
ways of preventing people from taking up drug
consumption, and possible alternatives to imprisonment.
24. Mr. Costa (Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)),
responding to the question raised by the representative
of India, explained that the Office was nowhere close
to publishing a world crime report that would be aA/C.3/64/SR.5
5 09-55418
counterpart to the World Drug Report. While there
were statistics available on drug trafficking, the
situation with respect to organizes transnational crime
was quite different. The main difficulty was to agree on
units of measurement, for the important thing was to
measure not perceptions but reality. In February,
UNODC had produced a first world report on human
trafficking. It has also presented to the Security
Council a report on organized crime in West Africa, in
Central America, in the Caribbean and in the Balkans,
and it was about to publish one on East Africa. This
represented a first step towards producing a global
study of organized crime, and he would welcome the
assistance and advice of States for this purpose.
25. Responding to the representative of Benin, the
Executive Director confirmed that factories producing
synthetic drugs had recently appeared in West Africa.
On the other hand, with respect to possible duplicity on
the part of certain Governments, he did not think that this
was the case, even in the major producing countries, for
the very good reason that over the last century no country
had been able to achieve lasting development by relying
on illicit activities. The evidence suggested very clearly
that there was corruption in these countries and that it
facilitated drug trafficking – money could not be
laundered, for example, without what was called the
“white collar mafia” – but one could not speak of
duplicity at the official level.
26. Responding to the statement of the representative
of Kenya, the Executive Director stressed that that
country was suffering from activities in Somalia and
the lack of control on the part of the Somali
Government, and he noted that UNODC was the main
institution combating piracy in Kenya. Actions needed
to be pursued not only at sea but also on land; steps
must be taken to counter this phenomena by promoting
development and improving economic conditions in
the pirates’ home countries, and making use of the
courts. UNODC must therefore help improve the
judicial system in the region’s most seriously affected
countries, particularly Kenya, and Member States must
also contribute their support. As to decriminalizing
drug abuse, UNODC had consistently pursued this line
of action. The Office considered that drug abuse in its
many forms was mainly a health problem. The Executive
Director asked Member States not to put drug addicts in
jail but to take them in hand and provide them care, and
to be much tougher towards the drug barons.
27. Mrs. Booker (Bahamas) asked what cooperation
projects the Office was planning with Caribbean
countries.
28. Mr. Costa (Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC))
confirmed that UNODC was cooperating with
countries of the region, although it had had to close its
office in Barbados because it was ineffective. Together
with the World Bank, the Office was working to
prepare a report on crime in the Caribbean, and its
causes. The countries of this region were poor, their
population was young, there were great income
disparities, and justice systems were ineffective, a
combination of elements that explained the prevalence
of crime in these countries. This problem was also an
obstacle to foreign investment and was thus a factor of
underdevelopment. The UNODC report had been
presented to the ministerial meeting held in Santo
Domingo in February 2009, and the initiatives
proposed had been ratified. In follow-up to the
Political Declaration on Combating Illicit Drug
Trafficking, Organized Crime, Terrorism and Other
Serious Crime in the Caribbean, UNODC had decided
to replicate in that region an initiative conducted in
Asia to combat drug trafficking.
29. Mr. Benwik (Sweden) took the floor on behalf of
the European Union. Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Turkey (candidate
countries), Albania, Montenegro and Serbia
(stabilization and association process and potential
candidate countries) as well as Norway, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia associated
themselves with his statement. Pointing to the
worldwide nature of organized crime, which had
harmful effects in many areas, he said the European
Union would continue its determined effort to fight
organized crime, and impunity as well, by participating
actively in all initiatives of the international
community, seeking full enforcement of the pertinent
international instruments to which most Member States
were party, and supporting regional mechanisms of
judicial and police cooperation.
30. The European Union was determined to eliminate
human trafficking and to protect the victims of this
modern form of slavery through stricter law enforcement
and through attacking the deep economic and social
causes of the problem. The European Union welcomed
the many recent adherents to the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, EspeciallyA/C.3/64/SR.5
09-55418 6
Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, and it encouraged States parties to collaborate
more closely to enforce these two instruments by
creating a solid and effective follow-up mechanism.
31. The European Union was also determined to
combat corruption, which undermined institutions and
impeded development. The United Nations Convention
against Corruption illustrated the position of the
international community in this area, and States parties
should take the occasion of the Doha conference in
November 2009 to prepare an effective, transparent
follow-up mechanism that was open to all.
32. Highlighting the pressing need to combat
terrorism in all its forms while respecting international
law, the European Union stressed the key role of the
United Nations in this regard and gave its unreserved
support to the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, calling upon all stakeholders
including civil society and the private sector to devote
themselves to implementing it. The European Union
was providing active support to the Monitoring Team,
which must remain the principal oversight body for
coordinated and integrated application of the strategy.
He commended the joint work of the Executive
Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Terrorism Prevention Branch of UNODC and
stressed the need to give that branch the resources
necessary to carry out its mandate.
33. The European Union welcomed the adoption,
during the fifty-second session of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, of the Policy Declaration and Plan of
Action on international cooperation, calling for a
balanced and comprehensive approach to solving the
world drug problem. He recalled that this struggle must
be pursued with full respect for international law, the
rule of law, and the principle of proportionality. The
European Union had taken account of the objectives set
by the United Nations in preparing its anti-drug action
plan for 2009-2012, and comprehensive regional
strategies were needed to combat drug consumption
and trafficking.
34. Echoing the strong message contained in Security
Council resolution 1817 (2008), the European Union
was calling upon all Member States, in particular the
producing countries, neighbouring countries and
countries of transit, to step up international and
regional cooperation to halt the diversion of chemical
precursors, to redouble efforts to reduce narcotics
supply and demand and the harmful consequences of
drug abuse, and to facilitate access to treatment. It also
welcomed the decisions taken recently on this matter
by the Economic and Social Council.
35. Finally, the European Union was deeply concerned
at the rising instances of piracy, hostage-taking – which it
vigorously condemned – and armed robberies, in the face
of which the international community must react
appropriately.
36. Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan), speaking on behalf
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO),
said that drug trafficking, which was closely linked to
terrorism and to transnational organized crime,
constituted not only a grave health threat but also a
danger for the stability of States and of the international
community as a whole. For this reason, the problem
needed to be attacked from all angles, and it should be
examined each year by the Third Committee. Member
States of the CSTO shared the view of UNODC that
narcotics should not be legalized and that, on the
contrary, controls and measures to combat the illicit
spread of narcotics in the world should be reinforced.
37. While heroin and cocaine production was declining,
there were still some 250 million drug consumers around
the world, or 6 per cent of the global population, and the
proceeds of drug trafficking exceeded the GNP of more
than 90 countries. Resort to synthetic drugs and
injectable drugs was rising year by year. Central Asia
was particularly threatened by the spread of heroin
production in Afghanistan, which accounted for 90 per
cent of world supply. Every year, 150 tons of heroin
from that country transited through Central Asia
towards Russia and Europe, posing a grave threat to
peace and international security. The CSTO member
States, which were neither producing nor destination
countries, were seeing an upsurge in drug abuse.
38. Under these conditions, regional cooperation
must continue as the most effective means of putting
an end to narcotics trafficking. CSTO member States
were working in this area under the leadership of the
Coordinating Council of anti-drug-trafficking
authorities. The prevention operation known as
“Channel”, which had been given permanent status in
2008, had been developed for purposes of eliminating
the networks trafficking drugs and chemical precursors
in Central Asia and in Russia. In 2008, with the support
of a growing number of CSTO member States and theA/C.3/64/SR.5
7 09-55418
Commonwealth of Independent States, this operation
helped to reduce the volume of narcotics trafficking, to
prevent delinquency and to improve the crime
situation, and had resulted in the seizure of significant
quantities of heroin, hashish and synthetic drugs. As
well, the creation of a regional information and
coordination centre for Central Asia, which would
officially open its doors in late 2009, was one of the
joint projects carried out under the Memorandum of
Cooperation for controlling the illicit production and
trafficking of narcotics, psychotropic substances and their
precursors and against drug abuse, which States of the
region and UNODC had signed in 1996. This centre
would cooperate with the Office to analyse and share
information on trafficking in narcotics originating in
Afghanistan. As well, in 2008 and 2009 the Coordination
Council had held several meetings and seminars in
collaboration with the European Union and UNODC, and
the competent bodies of CSTO member States had
examined jointly the possibility of establishing a
protective cordon around Afghanistan to ensure
financial security and to combat drug production. At
one of its sessions, the CSTO Permanent Council on
Collective Security had adopted a series of joint
measures to combat trafficking in narcotics,
psychotropic substances and their chemical precursors,
as part of the Paris-Moscow process, which would
serve as the basis for an international strategy in this
matter. To reinforce control over trafficking in
narcotics coming from Afghanistan, it would be well to
hold a third conference at the ministerial level at the
end of 2010, under the Paris Pact Initiative.
39. It was also urgent to involve Afghanistan in
controlling narcotics production on its territory and to
cooperate with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
to improve the effectiveness of action pursued in the
region. There was also a need to improve mechanisms
for coordinating the aid provided for controlling drug
trafficking and for boosting the economy and
reinforcing peace and security in Afghanistan.
Welcoming the growing role that the International
Security Assistance Force was playing in this area,
CSTO member States would like to see the issue of
chemical precursors in Afghanistan examined pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1817 (2008).
40. United Nations Member States had been waging a
long and courageous battle to eliminate not only the illicit
supply of narcotics but also the demand for them, through
international cooperation and national strategies, and they
must persevere on this path. The CSTO was ready to
cooperate with the United Nations and to make every
effort to put an end to this world problem.
41. Mr. Ashiki (Japan) pointed out that technical
progress was a mixed blessing, as it also promoted
transnational organized crime, and in particular human
trafficking, cybercrime, weapons and drugs trafficking,
and corruption. The international community could
only stamp out this scourge through concerted efforts
involving the private sector, and by empowering all
stakeholders. It must not be content with remedying the
harmful effects of transnational organized crime, but
must also foster sustainable development for fragile
States in order to eliminate the underlying causes of
crime and thus move closer to the common goal of
human security.
42. In its efforts against transnational organized
crime Japan was acting on three fronts. First, it was
helping establish the necessary multilateral legal
framework by encouraging universal adherence to the
existing instruments and the adoption of new
instruments. Second, it was offering legal aid to
developing countries, particularly in Asia, hosting
seminars on the application of counter-terrorism
instruments and financing capacity-building activities
by UNODC. Since the end of the Second World War,
Japan had in this area pursued a policy of zero
tolerance, as evident in its “Dame zettai” campaign,
and the International Narcotics Control Board had
praised its action. Japan would be happy to share with
other countries the experience it had gained in taking a
comprehensive approach that targeted both supply and
demand, together with strict controls. It would continue
to offer official development assistance for eradicating
poverty, a factor for criminal activity, and reinforcing
peace and security in the world. It was also fighting
crime through such initiatives as the drug control and
alternative development project, which had succeeded
in wiping out poppy growing in the Wa region of
Myanmar. Third, Japan was encouraging concerted
action by Governments and international organizations,
including UNODC. It thought it essential that the Third
Committee should give careful attention to the
questions referred to it and should formulate specific
proposals, and it supported the Political Declaration
and Plan of Action adopted by the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs in March 2009 and the decision taken
by the parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime in October 2008 toA/C.3/64/SR.5
09-55418 8
create a working group to oversee enforcement of the
trafficking protocol. Finally, it hoped that the
Conference of Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Corruption would result in creating
an effective monitoring mechanism.
43. Japan thanked Brazil for hosting the twelfth
United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, a forum that was contributing to the
primacy of law and the adoption of a comprehensive
approach to cooperation in this area. Japan sincerely
hoped that the international community would seize
that occasion to move forward towards reinforcing the
legal framework and policing capacities, sustaining the
development of developing countries, and promoting
coordination among States and international
organizations in order to rid the world of transnational
organized crime.
44. Mr. Tarar (Pakistan) regretted that the
considerable means offered by the information age
were being diverted to criminal purposes, and he
stressed that transnational organized crime was
thriving because of the poverty of developing countries
as well as the technical progress of rich countries. The
drug trade, human trafficking and money-laundering
were all fuelled by demand from rich countries, which
was being supplied from developing countries. Given
the characteristics of international crime, combating it
required not only respect for the obligations imposed
by international instruments and the forging of
partnerships but also, at the local level, implementing
alternative development activities and pursuing
programmes to eradicate poverty.
45. Aware of its responsibilities in the face of the
complex and multifaceted phenomenon of transnational
crime, Pakistan considered that the world drug problem
required stronger international cooperation, and it
hoped that the Policy Declaration and Plan of Action
would contribute to eliminating the drug problem.
Pakistan had succeeded in halting the illicit growing of
opium poppies, through a strategy based both on
suppression and on alternative development. As a
transit country, Pakistan had taken an active part in
regional and international operations to control the
flow of drugs from neighbouring regions and the flow
of chemical precursors to those regions. Its drug
control plan for 2009-2013 took account of the
situation in the region and included measures to reduce
supply and demand. The country was participating in
international operations, such as the UNODC
“Rainbow Strategy”, as well as in regional operations
such as the trilateral initiative between Afghanistan,
the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan, which the
Secretary-General had praised for its effectiveness.
46. With respect to human trafficking, Pakistan had
promulgated a prevention ordinance, under which civil
society was helping to rehabilitate the victims. A
national plan of action would be adopted shortly and a
counter-trafficking unit had been created within the
Federal Investigation Agency. Pakistan had recently
subscribed to the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and had
promulgated an anti-money-laundering ordinance
creating within the national bank a financial control
unit to cooperate with other countries in combating
money-laundering and terrorist financing.
47. With the assistance of the Asian Development
Bank, the access to justice programme was helping
reform the criminal justice system and to modernize the
police forces. To control its borders more effectively,
Pakistan was introducing the Personal Identification
Secure Comparison and Evaluation System, with
assistance from the international community. The struggle
against international crime required a comprehensive
approach and a firm, long-term political and financial
commitment, including capacity-building and
appropriate financial and technical assistance.
48. Mr. Sanchez (Mexico) called on all Member States
to redouble their efforts against trafficking, which the
President of his country had called “the slavery of the
twenty-first century”. Pointing to some of the broad
trends cited in the UNODC World Drug Report, he said
that Mexico was engaged in an all-out struggle against
criminal organizations, while seeking to protect the
country’s young people from the scourge of drug
abuse. The money seized during police operations has
been used to open 320 “New Life Centres” throughout
the country, dedicated to preventing drug abuse.
49. International cooperation was essential for drug
control, and Mexico was playing an active part in all
regional and international initiatives against drugs and
drug-related crime. On this point, he welcomed
adoption of the Political Declaration and Plan of
Action against narcotics at the fifty-second session of
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and recalled the
draft resolution on combating the laundering of assets
derived from drug trafficking and related offences that
Mexico had presented on that occasion.A/C.3/64/SR.5
9 09-55418
50. Mexico was firmly engaged in the battle against
drugs, and would once again be presenting a resolution
on “international cooperation to counter the world drug
problem”, which would focus this year on the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action. Given the importance
of those instruments for the international community,
that resolution should receive unanimous support.
51. Mr. Johnson (United States of America) welcomed
adoption of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action,
which would assist progress in enforcing the three United
Nations Conventions on Narcotics and Psychotropic
Substances, and which should now be approved by
resolution of the General Assembly.
52. Despite the instances of success that the United
States had achieved in drug control, such as the decline in
the consumption of illicit drugs and prescription
medications among adolescents since 2002, the problem
was still sizable and new measures were therefore
planned, in particular a new drug control strategy more
comprehensive than the old “war on drugs”, which had
shown its limitations, and a new focus on the
prevention and treatment of drug abuse, which was a
disease. The United States would continue its research
to identify the most effective methods and to share
them with the rest of the international community.
Steps also had to be taken, however, to dismantle
international criminal organizations, which were
enriching themselves illegally and were threatening
political stability, economic growth, and the rule of law
in many countries. To this end, greater use would have
to be made of the international instruments in place.
53. Progress had been made in combating drugs in
the American hemisphere, particularly in Colombia and
in Mexico. Accepting its responsibility to contribute to
these efforts, the United States was working to
strengthen collaboration with countries of the region,
specifically within the Merida Initiative, in order to
improve the prevention and treatment of drug abuse, to
promote the rule of law, and to combat the criminal
organizations that threatened societies.
54. On the other hand, in West Africa and in
Afghanistan drug trafficking posed a threat to political
stability and economic growth. The United States
would continue to fund UNODC activities, particularly
in Afghanistan, and it called on other countries to make
off-budget contributions to the Office as well.
55. Member countries should cooperate more closely
in the struggle against crime and corruption, and
should ratify and enforce the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. As
to the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
it was entering into its application phase and the
United States was looking forward to the conference to
be held in Doha in November 2009, at which States
parties would try to produce an effective, transparent
and open monitoring mechanism. The United States
intended this year to toughen its policy on admitting to
its territory persons who paid or received bribes.
56. Mr. Edrees (Egypt) welcomed the technical
assistance that UNODC was extending to developing
countries to reinforce the capacity to counter devastating
scourges such as terrorism, corruption and transnational
organized crime. At this time of globalization, the
international community must stand united against crime
and at the same time combat the drug trade, human
trafficking, money-laundering and terrorist financing.
57. It was true that the areas planted in conventional
narcotic crops had declined but action now had to be
taken against synthetic drugs, which technical progress
had made easier to develop. This called for stronger
international cooperation.
58. While the efforts of UNODC and its partners
were laudable, the United Nations should work in
closer partnership with Africa, and in particular with
countries emerging from conflict, and also with the
African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders. The success of reconstruction
efforts was heavily dependent on the assistance that
United Nations agencies were supplying for the
implementation of strategies and action plans against
organized crime and trafficking, particularly as the
persistence of this phenomenon was undermining
efforts to consolidate peace and was at the same time
facilitating the purchase of light weapons and
supporting global terrorist networks. The importance of
international cooperation against drug trafficking had
also been reaffirmed by the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs at its fifty-second session, during which it had
prepared an international plan of action, one that
Member States should strive to implement fully.
59. When it came to human trafficking and the sexual
exploitation of women and children, the international
community was just beginning to take action. Despite
the many international instruments to combat this
phenomenon – most recently the 2000 United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime andA/C.3/64/SR.5
09-55418 10
its protocols – there were more than 12 million people, in
their majority women and children, who were victims of
forced labour, while the profits generated by the sexual
exploitation of women and children amounted to $28
billion. Human trafficking for sexual exploitation,
forced labour or the sale of organs ranked third among
the most profitable types of organized crime in the
world, after weapons and narcotics trafficking.
60. Current measures were inadequate to combat
human trafficking. Egypt, for its part, had launched a
national campaign under the leadership of the First
Lady to combat and prevent human trafficking, to
protect the victims, and to bring the perpetrators to
justice. The First Lady had also taken part in the World
Forum to Fight Human Trafficking organized by
UNODC in February 2008 and had headed a national
campaign under the slogan “Let’s put an end to
trafficking!”, under the auspices of the Suzanne
Mubarak International Movement of Women for Peace,
intended to reinforce the role of civil society and the
private sector in combating this scourge, which
afflicted the African continent in particular. At its
summit in Sharm el-Sheikh, the African Union had
adopted a resolution in this sense, thereby confirming
the unity of the efforts deployed by Africa and the
international community to formulate a world action
plan. The Sharm el-Sheikh Summit Declaration
adopted by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in
July 2009 gave clear expression to the determination of
member countries to work for adoption of a world plan
of action to eliminate human trafficking, recognizing
that the current legal framework was inadequate. Egypt
had no doubt that the General Assembly would do its
all to support the preparation of such an instrument.
61. Egypt vigorously condemned terrorist attacks,
whatever their motivation, and in particular the one
committed in Pakistan on 6 October 2009 against a
United Nations building, which had killed several staff
members. Negotiations should be re-launched for a
general convention on international terrorism and the
definition of terrorist acts should be revised to
recognize the differences between a terrorist act and a
legitimate act committed in accordance with international
humanitarian law by national liberation movements in the
exercise of their right to self-determination. Adoption of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
represented a decisive milestone, placing as it did
greater stress on the need to examine the existing
framework for international cooperation. The time had
come to organize an international conference without
delay, under United Nations auspices, in order to
formulate a definition of terrorism and on that basis to
negotiate a global convention on terrorism.
62. Mrs. Kolontai (Belarus) said the international
community must show determination in meeting the
many challenges threatening the security of States and
the world, and this could be done only through political
partnership. Governments, international organizations
and civil society should pool their efforts to curb
human trafficking, which was a true attack on human
dignity. It was laudable that the United Nations was
paying greater attention to this question, and UNDP in
particular, which in 2009 for the first time had devoted
a chapter of its Human Development Report to human
trafficking; and of course UNODC had published the
2009 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons.
63. In 2006 and in 2008 Belarus had submitted a
draft resolution on improving coordination against
human trafficking, and calling for creation of a
partnership against trafficking and other contemporary
forms of slavery, and it intended to go further in 2009
by presenting a new draft resolution setting out specific
measures for institutionalizing that partnership.
64. As to preparation of the world plan of action against
trafficking, all United Nations Member States should
participate actively in the work. Human trafficking would
in this way be more severely suppressed, something that
was essential when one recognized that 20 per cent of
its victims were children.
65. Mr. Liu (China) said that the international
community had continued to make progress in 2009 in
preventing and combating transnational crime. The
United Nations Conventions against Transnational
Organized Crime and against Corruption and the three
conventions of 1961, 1971 and 1988 on narcotics and
psychotropic substances had certainly laid the basis for
global governance, but international terrorism,
transnational organized crime and the production and
trafficking of drugs, all of which were inextricably
linked, were thriving unabated. To prevent and combat
them effectively, international cooperation must be
reinforced in the areas of extradition, legal and technical
assistance, and recovery of assets, for example, while
respecting the principles of sovereignty, equality and
mutual interest. In this regard China supported the
work of UNODC and the Commission for Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice.A/C.3/64/SR.5
11 09-55418
66. China had always been conscientious in fulfilling
its obligations under the conventions against
transnational organized crime and corruption. It had
taken legislative, executive and judicial measures and
had amended its Criminal Code to reinforce the fight
against corruption and human trafficking; it had also
signed 106 treaties of legal assistance
67. China was firmly opposed to the illegal trade in
small arms and light weapons: it had strict controls on
their export and was prepared to play a more active role
regionally and internationally to put an end to the traffic.
68. When it came to narcotics control, the
international community had made progress but there
were still great obstacles to be overcome. Despite the
drop in global output of cocaine and heroin and the
shrinking market for cannabis and opium, the
production, trafficking and consumption of new drugs
showed no signs of declining, the diversion of
chemical precursors remained a cause of concern,
funds for financing alternative development activities
were inadequate, and youth remained in thrall to drug
abuse. International cooperation was of the essence
here. In this regard, China supported the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action adopted at the fifty-
second session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
and it welcomed the work done by UNODC and the
International Narcotics Control Bureau. China applied
a total ban on drugs and had adopted a comprehensive
and integrated national strategy. It was controlling
chemical precursors strictly and taking resolute steps to
combat trafficking in those substances. Finally, it
attached great importance to educating young people
and adolescents to prevent drug abuse.
69. China was actively involved in various
international and regional mechanisms to control drugs
and combat drug-related offences. It had successfully
helped neighbouring countries to choose substitute
crops for opium, and was also cooperating tirelessly
with the United States and with European countries
with a view to eliminating the scourge of narcotics.
70. Mr. Thaung Tun (Myanmar) welcomed the
Political Declaration and Plan of Action adopted at the
fifty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs and pointed out that, while drug control was by
no means a new issue, the scourge of narcotics was
now making itself felt around the planet. Banning the
marketing of a given drug, as had been done in recent
decades, served only to shift the problem to other
substances. In addition to considering supply and
demand, questions of health and the promotion of
viable means of livelihood also had to be taken into
account. The struggle against drugs would not be won
without the political will to attack the problem and
without recognition by States that they had an interest
in helping each other.
71. Myanmar was hoping to eliminate illicit drugs from
its territory by the year 2014, through a 15-year plan
based on two strategies that involved anti-narcotics
campaigns and eradicating opium poppy crops in border
areas while offering producers other means of livelihood
and raising living standards. Considerable funds had
already been committed to infrastructure improvements
to this end, and Myanmar had received valuable
assistance from the United Nations and other
international players. At the same time, Myanmar had
reinforced its legislation and its legal capacities and
had in this way succeeded in cutting annual opium
production substantially and in eliminating opium poppy
growing in some parts of the country. New tendencies in
the consumption of illicit drugs and psychotropic
substances were emerging among young people, however.
Myanmar was well aware of the threat posed by
stimulants of the amphetamine type. It did not produce
the chemical precursors used to make these synthetic
drugs, and it was cooperating closely with
neighbouring countries to control those substances and
keep them out of its territory. The security forces of
Myanmar were also doing effective work in this field.
72. Yet despite all the progress made, greater efforts
would be needed to rid the world of this scourge and to
accompany national efforts by regional and
international cooperation.
73. Mr. Kleib (Indonesia) welcomed the growing
attention that was being paid to new forms of crime such
as trafficking in forest products, including lumber, wild
species and other biological forest resources, which not
only affected individuals but also undermined the
ecosystem. Hailing the decision taken in 2008 by the
Conference of Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime to examine this
question at its 2010 session, he said that the twelfth
United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice would provide the opportunity to
consolidate the strategy for combating new forms of
crime, and declared that Indonesia supported the efforts to
prepare two United Nations conventions, one against
cybercrime and the other against money-laundering.A/C.3/64/SR.5
09-55418 12
74. Combating corruption remained a high priority
for Indonesia, which had participated voluntarily in a
pilot programme to examine implementation of the
United Nations convention on this matter. Indonesia
had also adopted a national plan of action against
corruption, including both preventive and repressive
measures. Finally, it was cooperating closely with other
countries to facilitate the return of stolen assets to their
countries of origin under the StAR initiative.
75. With respect to human trafficking, Indonesia was
firmly opposed to it and was calling for action to clamp
down on international trafficking rings and to guarantee
protection for victims. Together with Australia, Indonesia
had co-chaired the third regional ministerial conference
on people smuggling, trafficking in persons and related
transnational crime, known as the Bali Process.
76. On the counterterrorism front, Indonesia had been
hard hit by this scourge and believed that its root
causes must be attacked, while ensuring respect for
human rights and the rule of law. It would continue to
promote moderation and tolerance, while at the same
time stepping up enforcement measures. Because
terrorism recognized no borders, Indonesia was
contributing to a number of regional programmes to
strengthen capacities and share information through the
Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation, in
close partnership with the Australian Government.
77. Finally, when it came to international drug
control, Indonesia welcomed the Political Declaration
and Plan of Action adopted at the fifty-second session
of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs. Indonesia was
determined to help strengthen international cooperation
and was convinced that, if they were to be effective,
the measures adopted must take into account both
supply and demand, and that alternative development
activities would have to be proposed for combating
drugs effectively. International cooperation and the
sharing of responsibilities would be needed to
guarantee success in these actions.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.