United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.44
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
3 February 2010
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-61363 (E)
*0961363*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 44th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 19 November 2009, at 3 p.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/64/SR.44
09-61363 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.61)
Draft decision A/C.3/64/L.61: Report of the Human
Rights Council
1. Ms. Kondolo (Zambia), introducing the draft
decision on behalf of the African Group, said that the
Human Rights Council was making a significant
contribution to overcoming the obstacles that in the
past had shackled international efforts to consolidate
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
That had been made possible by its constructive and
cooperative approach to human rights questions, based
on the provision of advice and technical and financial
assistance upon the request of Governments, which had
primary responsibility for protecting the human rights
of their citizens. Its report dealt with issues to which
the African Group attached great importance. She
looked forward to adoption of the draft decision by
consensus as a message of strong support for the
important work of the Council.
2. The African Group was however deeply
concerned at the changes made to the text by the
Secretariat without consulting the Group. The
paragraphs of the original text had been merged and it
had been submitted as a draft decision, rather than a
draft resolution. In so doing the Secretariat had
usurped the rightful role of Member States; that was
unacceptable.
3. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) took
note of the concern raised by the representative of
Zambia but stressed that the Secretariat in no way
wished to substitute itself for Member States. It was
the role of the Secretariat, however, to advise member
States and, for example, to edit texts submitted for
issuance; its editing changes and recommendations
were by and large accepted by Member States and the
General Assembly.
4. The editing service had determined that the
substance and format of the draft proposal made it
more appropriate to submit the text as a draft decision.
The Secretariat had been notified of the changes only
the previous day and, while it had informed the main
sponsor, there had not been sufficient time for
consultations. The main sponsor had, however, been
advised that the text itself could be re-issued as
originally submitted, in two paragraphs and with three
headings. He noted that the final authority with regard
to the format of the text remained with the General
Assembly.
5. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) associated himself with the
statement made by the representative of Zambia. He
acknowledged the Secretariat’s role in offering advice
to delegations but stressed that delegations had the
right to accept or reject that advice. In the case before
the Committee the Secretariat had made changes
without obtaining the approval of the delegation
concerned. That was unprecedented and unacceptable
and must not be repeated.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.30/Rev.1,
A/C.3/64/L.40, A/C.3/64/L.42/Rev.1 and
A/C.3/64/L.47)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.30/Rev.1: The right to food
6. The Chairperson said that he had been advised
that the draft resolution contained no programme
budget implications.
7. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that Australia,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Cambodia, France,
Germany, Fiji, Finland, Greece, India, Ireland,
Liechtenstein, Netherlands, Seychelles, South Africa,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom and Vanuatu had joined the
sponsors. Hunger was a violation of human dignity; its
elimination must be a priority for action at the national,
regional and international levels. It was appalling that
the number of persons in the world who did not have
enough food was growing, a trend that had been
accelerated by the current economic crisis, which was
attributable to structural and systemic weaknesses in
the international trade system. She called on all States
to adopt policies and support international trade
agreements that would not have a negative effect on
the food supply in other countries.
8. She wished to make two revisions to the text of
the draft resolution. In the fourteenth preambular
paragraph, “guaranteeing” should be replaced by “to
guarantee”; in paragraph 13, “to become” should be
replaced by “to favourably consider becoming”. SheA/C.3/64/SR.44
3 09-61363
hoped that the draft resolution would be adopted by
consensus.
9. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Botswana, Burkina Faso, Central African
Republic, Malta, Morocco, Nauru, St. Kitts and Nevis
and Turkmenistan wished to join the sponsors.
10. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.30/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
11. Ms. Melon (Argentina) said that the promotion of
economic, social and cultural rights, including the right
to food, was a priority of her Government’s foreign
policy. Her delegation had joined the consensus on the
draft resolution and supported regional and multilateral
efforts to address the food crisis. It had participated in
efforts to reform the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) Committee
on World Food Security. It would likewise continue to
work for the elimination of the food policies in the
developed countries that distorted international trade
and resulted in under-investment in agriculture and
severe food insecurity in many developing countries.
12. Her delegation did not share the view that the
concept of food sovereignty should be substituted for
that of food security. Trade policies should be in
conformity with the accepted rules of international
trade and subject to reform as necessary. The General
Assembly must consider the issue of trade-distorting
food policies and subsidies in the context of food
security and identify imbalances in the agricultural
sector worldwide with a view to adopting policies that
would lead to the elimination of hunger in the world.
13. Ms. Sunderland (Canada) said that her
delegation supported the progressive realization of the
right to food as a component of the right of everyone to
an adequate standard of living. It reported on its efforts
to promote the right to food in the context of its
periodic reports to the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights and had been pleased to join the
consensus with regard to the draft resolution.
14. She noted, however, with regard to paragraph 26
of the draft resolution, that the concepts of food
security and the right to food did not appear anywhere
in the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS) agreement. It was her delegation’s
position that paragraph 26 simply encouraged World
Trade Organization (WTO) member States to consider
the manner in which they implemented that agreement;
it did not suggest that United Nations Member States
should make substantive interpretations of the TRIPS
agreement nor did it instruct WTO member States on
how to implement it. Moreover, there was nothing in
the TRIPS agreement that prevented States from
pursuing objectives relating to the right to food and
food security.
15. While her delegation appreciated the efforts of
the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on the right to food, she said that his report could have
presented a more balanced perspective on how
effective intellectual property rights and plant variety
protection could contribute to food security.
16. Mr. Suárez (Colombia) said that his delegation
had joined the consensus because it considered the
right to food to be an important element in the
realization of the fundamental rights to life, health and
personal integrity. With regard to paragraph 26 of the
draft resolution, however, he underscored that trade-
related aspects of intellectual property rights fell within
the mandate of WTO. Furthermore, since there was no
internationally agreed definition of food security, his
delegation understood the reference to “food
sovereignty” in paragraph 15 as simply suggesting
study of that concept for further clarification.
17. As for references in the text to international trade
in general, international trade in a context of distortion-
free and transparent markets provided an opportunity
to promote investment in agriculture, rural
development and food production, in particular in the
developing countries. His delegation understood
references to biological diversity to be understood in
the context of the Convention on Biological Diversity,
which was the binding international instrument in that
regard. With regard to paragraph 25 and its references
to international cooperation, there were important areas
where assistance was essential for full realization of
the right to food.
18. Mr. Kuehl (United States of America) said that
his delegation was pleased to join in the consensus on
the resolution on the right to food for the first time.
Combating global hunger and promoting food security
was a key foreign policy objective of his Government,
as evidenced by the agreement at the recent Group of
Eight Summit in L’Aquila, Italy, concerning principles
for a comprehensive and coordinated approach to
support country-led food security strategies and related
pledges of US$ 20 billion over the next three years, asA/C.3/64/SR.44
09-61363 4
well as by the “Partnering for Food Security”
conference of 26 September 2009, which had been
co-hosted by his Government and the Secretary-
General with a view to building further support for
those principles. His delegation looked forward to
working with partners to implement those principles on
the ground. The United States was also committed to
realization of the Millennium Development Goal of
eradicating extreme poverty and hunger, including the
target of halving by 2015 the proportion of people who
suffered from hunger.
19. While his Government’s objective was to achieve
a world where everyone had adequate access to food, it
did not consider the right to food to be a formal,
enforceable obligation. The United States was not a
party to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights but interpreted the
resolution’s references to the right to food in the light
of its Article 2, paragraph 1, in which States Parties
undertake to take steps “with a view to achieving
progressively the full realization” of economic, social,
and cultural rights. Moreover, while the United States
was the world’s largest food aid donor, it did not agree
that States had particular extraterritorial obligations
arising from the right to food.
20. His delegation likewise had concerns with regard
to the treatment of the issues of international trade
liberalization, the Doha Round and the TRIPS
agreement in the text. He associated himself with the
statement made by the representative of Canada
concerning paragraph 25.
21. His delegation welcomed the work of the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and the Special Rapporteur on the right to food but had
significant disagreements with some of the
recommendations made by that Committee, including
its General Comment 12, and in the report of the
Special Rapporteur. That report could have been
strengthened by presenting a more balanced view of
the importance of adequate and effective intellectual
property rights and plant variety protection and their
role in promoting research and investment, meeting the
needs of farmers and ensuring food security.
22. Mr. Bennwick (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Turkey; the stabilization and association process
countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition, Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine, said that the European Union
was committed to the realization of the right to
adequate food.
23. States bore primary responsibility for adopting
measures, at the national level and in cooperation with
international partners, to meet the food needs of their
people and eradicate poverty. Good governance at the
national level and enjoyment of the full range of civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights were
critical in meeting those objectives. The main sponsors
of the draft resolution should therefore consider
increasing the focus on human rights, in particular
women’s rights, in the text.
24. With regard to paragraph 15, he noted that the
concept of food sovereignty was not internationally
defined. The European Union supported respect for
rules-based international systems in all fields. While it
accepted the possibility of differentiated treatment for
developing countries, it did not accept that States could
freely implement policies that disregarded the rules-
based international system, which had been established
taking into account various considerations, including
food security.
25. Furthermore, a rights-based approach should
emphasize strengthening entitlements as well as
promoting food production. An emphasis on national
production and availability of food rather than
individual entitlement did not, for example, address the
needs of the urban poor, landless peasants or
subsistence farmers.
26. Ms. Lemmetty (Finland) said that her delegation
strongly supported the implementation of economic,
social and cultural rights and attached great importance
to the right to food and States’ obligation to promote
that right. In the previous two years her delegation had
not, however, been able to join the consensus on the
draft resolution because of its weak and unclear
reference to the Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples. The relevant part of the current
text, while still inadequate, had nevertheless been
strengthened. Her delegation therefore had been able to
join in the consensus in the hope that the text would be
further strengthened in the future.A/C.3/64/SR.44
5 09-61363
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.40: Subregional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
27. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that he wished to inform the Committee, in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, and with reference to paragraphs 5 and 6 of
the draft resolution, that the total resources proposed
for the Centre under section 23, Human Rights, of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2010-
2011 amounted to US$ 2,271,700 (before re-costing),
which included nine posts (four professional, one
national officer and four locally recruited staff) as well
as non-post resources. In addition, the Centre was
supported by extrabudgetary resources estimated at
US$ 634,700 for the biennium 2010-2011. Additional
provisions had made in the programme budget for the
biennium 2008-2009 in response to the request
contained in General Assembly resolution 62/221.
Should the Third Committee adopt the draft resolution,
there would be no requirement for additional
provisions under the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011.
28. With regard to paragraph 6, he drew attention to
the provisions of section VI of General Assembly
resolution 45/248B and subsequent resolutions, the
most recent of which was General Assembly resolution
62/236, in which the General Assembly had reaffirmed
that the Fifth Committee was the appropriate Main
Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with
responsibilities for administrative and budgetary
matters and also reaffirmed the role of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
29. Ms. Mballa Eyenga (Cameroon) said that
Guinea-Bissau, Luxembourg, Namibia, Swaziland and
Togo had joined the sponsors. She underscored the
importance of the work of the Subregional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa, a
region facing many challenges as the result of conflict
situations. She called on Member States to once again
adopt the draft resolution without a vote as a gesture of
solidarity and in order to ensure that the Centre would
have the necessary resources to implement its mandate.
30. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Central African Republic, Croatia,
Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Lesotho, Serbia,
Slovenia, Spain and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, wished to join the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
31. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.40 was adopted.
32. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), with regard to the
seventh preambular paragraph of the draft resolution,
recalled the reservations various delegations had
expressed with regard to the final document of the
2005 World Summit.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.42/Rev.1: International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
33. The Chairperson said that he had been informed
that the draft resolution contained no programme
budget implications.
34. Ms. Gasri (France), speaking also on behalf of
Argentina, said that Belize, Eritrea, Grenada,
Kazakhstan, India, Tanzania, Timor-Leste and Ukraine
had joined the sponsors. She urged member States to
sign or ratify the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
with a view to its entry into force in the very near
future.
35. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Central African Republic, Israel, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Somalia and South Africa wished to
join the sponsors of the draft resolution.
36. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.42/Rev.1 was
adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.47: The right to development
37. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that he was making a statement in accordance with rule
153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
with regard to paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 36 of the draft
resolution. The provision required to implement the
activities of the Working Group on the Right to
Development and the high-level task force on the
implementation of the right to development was
included under section 23, Human Rights, of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2010-
2011. In addition to the provisions under section 23,
Human Rights, provisions were included under
section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council Affairs and Conference Management, and
under section 28 (e), Administration-Geneva, of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2010-A/C.3/64/SR.44
09-61363 6
2011, to provide the required conference servicing to
the Working Group and the task force. Accordingly,
should the Third Committee adopt draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.47 there would be no requirement for
additional provisions under the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011.
38. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) noted with satisfaction
that China and Brazil had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution, the text of which had been updated to
reflect the language of Human Rights Council resolution
12/23, in particular with regard to the future work of the
Working Group on the Right to Development and the
high-level task force on the implementation of the right
to development and the elaboration of criteria and
operational subcriteria as well as an international legal
standard of a binding nature. She urged the Committee
to adopt the draft resolution as a sign of the
international community’s commitment to realization of
the right to development for all the peoples of the world.
39. The Chairperson said that a recorded vote had
been requested by the representative of the United
States of America.
40. Mr. Javaheri (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the European Union in explanation of vote before the
voting, expressed full support for the right to
development as an integral part of fundamental human
rights. The European Union would continue to play an
active role in the implementation of that right. Lack of
development must not, however, be invoked to justify
the curtailment of internationally recognized human
rights.
41. While national development efforts needed to be
supported by an enabling international economic
environment, States continued to have primary
responsibility for creating the conditions necessary for
the realization of the right to development. It was
therefore the understanding of the European Union that
human rights instruments dealt with the obligations of
a State to its citizens and not responsibilities between
States.
42. The European Union would continue to
collaborate with the Working Group on the Right to
Development and the high-level task force and
supported the extension of their mandate. However,
since the right to development remained undefined or
ill-defined, the European Union maintained its position
that the open-ended nature of the work of the Working
Group and the task force did not imply a process
intended to lead to a binding international legal
instrument.
43. He regretted that the European Union’s
suggestions aimed at balancing the text of the draft
resolution had not been taken into consideration and
that contentious references from past resolutions had
been included. That was unacceptable. The progressive
fulfilment of the right to development should take
place on a consensual basis, avoid politicization and be
based primarily on promotion of and respect for civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights.
44. The European Union suggested that the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries should consider
submitting a procedural resolution on the right to
development to the General Assembly with a view to
concentrating work on the right to development in
Geneva, where the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and relevant mandates conducted their work.
45. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting,
underscored his delegation’s long-standing
commitment to development for all, integration of
more economies into the global trade system and
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals,
including the eradication of extreme poverty. His
delegation did not, however, believe that the current
draft resolution reflected a genuine consensus on how
best to achieve those goals and would vote against it.
46. In particular, his delegation did not consider it
appropriate at the current time to consider the
elaboration of an international legal standard of a
binding nature. It also had concerns about the
resolution’s numerous statements concerning topics
that had little to do with the right to development. It
nonetheless welcomed the contribution of the
independent expert on the right to development and the
high-level task force and looked forward to continuing
engagement as the task force worked to identify
criteria and operational subcriteria on the right to
development. Those tools could be shaped through a
process of genuine consensus and would lay the
foundations for progress on such a vital issue.
47. Ms. Sunderland (Canada), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, expressed
support for the concept of the right to development,
which served as an important bridge between civil,
economic, political, cultural and social rights. Her
delegation had participated actively in the WorkingA/C.3/64/SR.44
7 09-61363
Group on the Right to Development. Along with the
high-level task force, it was helping to build a
consensus on difficult and divisive issues related to the
right to development.
48. She expressed concern, however, at the text
before the Committee and the limited opportunity for
discussion of its substance. The resolution incorporated
language from the recent Summit of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, which did not include all
Member States; all parties should be included in
discussions of such an important issue.
49. There was no international consensus on the right
to development and her delegation had serious
concerns regarding any consideration of a legally
binding instrument in that regard. Efforts should be
focused on more consensual and productive
alternatives, such as the sharing of best practices and
strengthening of existing initiatives. She hoped that a
more constructive and consensual approach that took
into account the views of all partners would prevail in
future discussions of the right to development and
regretted that her delegation’s attempts to negotiate
compromise language had not been given serious
consideration. Her delegation would vote against the
draft resolution.
50. Ms. Taylor (New Zealand), speaking also on
behalf of Switzerland in explanation of vote before the
voting, recalled that those delegations had voted in
favour of the relevant draft resolution the previous
year, but they had procedural and substantive concerns
with regard to the current text. She regretted that the
consultations had not been more transparent and
inclusive of the views of States from all regions. She
also expressed concern with paragraphs 6, 7 and 8, in
particular the suggested development of an
international legal standard of a binding nature, given
the absence of any international consensus on a
definition of the right to development. Her delegation
and the delegation of Switzerland would vote against
the draft resolution.
51. A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Israel, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Slovakia,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Cyprus, Finland, France,
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine, Vanuatu.
52. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.47 was adopted by
130 votes to 22, with 30 abstentions.A/C.3/64/SR.44
09-61363 8
53. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that full
realization of the right to development and the right of
peoples under foreign occupation and colonial
domination to self-determination, together with respect
for sovereignty and territorial integrity,
non-interference in internal affairs and prevention of
violence were fundamental for spreading the culture of
peace and ensuring friendly relations among nations.
54. Promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms should be undertaken in a constructive
manner. Equal treatment should be given to civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights,
including the right to development. Efforts to promote
human rights, in particular the right to development, as
well as democracy and good governance at the national
and international levels, were mutually reinforcing.
55. The Heads of State and Government of the
Movement, at the Summit meeting held in July 2009,
had underscored the need to continue to promote and
protect universally recognized human rights, in
particular the right to development. They had
reaffirmed the importance of making that right a reality
for everyone and decided to give due consideration to
the impact of unilateral economic and financial
coercive measures on its realization.
56. The Heads of State and Government had also
reaffirmed the need for a new global human order
aimed at reversing the growing disparities between rich
and poor, through the promotion of poverty
eradication, full and productive employment and
decent work, and social integration. The international
financial and economic crisis had severely affected the
economies of the developing countries in particular.
That crisis must be addressed with a view to promoting
human development, including actions aimed at
sustained economic growth, poverty eradication and
sustainable development. States must also combat
extreme poverty and hunger, implement the Global
Jobs Pact adopted by the International Labour
Organization (ILO) in June 2009 and foster
participation by the poorest members of society in
decision-making processes.
57. All States should implement measures for
implementation of the right to development, deepen
cooperation for development and promote effective
international cooperation. Lasting progress towards the
right to development, as well as equitable economic
relations, likewise required the establishment of a
favourable economic environment at the international
level.
58. The United Nations human rights machinery must
make operationalization of the right to development a
priority, including through the elaboration of a
convention on the right to development. The right to
development should be mainstreamed into the
Organization’s policies and activities, as well as the
policies and strategies of the international financial
institutions and the multilateral trading system.
Partnerships for development should be promoted and
political or other non-economic considerations should
not be used to justify discriminatory treatment against
the developing countries.
59. The draft resolution constituted a genuine attempt
to meet the aspirations of the peoples of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries for development and
prosperity. It was regrettable that some delegations had
decided to put it to a vote. In the future, all Member
States should work with more determination to achieve
consensus.
60. Ms. Zhang Dan (China) said that the right to
development was an inalienable right and one of the
pillars of the Organization’s work. The Human Rights
Council should strengthen its support for the Working
Group on the Right to Development and the high-level
task force on the implementation of the right to
development. The international community must work
to promote that right, encourage effective cooperation,
eliminate obstacles to its realization and mainstream
the right to development in the work of the United
Nations, the international financial institutions and the
multilateral trade system.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/64/L.35 and A/C.3/64/L.36)
61. Ms. Gendi (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries with regard to
the draft resolutions contained in documents
A/C.3/64/L.35 to L.37, recalled the provisions in the
outcome document of the 2005 World Summit relating
to the role of the Human Rights Council in addressing
human rights situations. The Heads of State and
Government of the Movement, at their 15th Summit,A/C.3/64/SR.44
9 09-61363
had emphasized that the Human Rights Council was
the principal body responsible for consideration of
human rights issues.
62. They had expressed deep concern with the
adoption of country-specific resolutions in the Third
Committee, which breached the principles of
universality, objectivity and non-selectivity and
undermined cooperation for the realization of human
rights. They had therefore reiterated the importance of
the universal periodic review as an impartial,
transparent, non-selective, constructive and
non-politicized mechanism for interactive dialogue
based on reliable information and full involvement of
the countries under review. All members had been
urged to support other members of the Movement
during the review process.
63. She therefore called on member States of the
Non-Aligned Movement to abide by the commitment
made in the relevant final documents during
consideration of the country-specific resolutions under
the current agenda item.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.35: Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
64. The Chairperson said that he had been advised
that the draft resolution contained no programme
budget implications.
65. Ms. Mirow (Sweden), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, said that the draft resolution reflected
the concerns of the international community at the
widespread and grave violations of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. She would
have preferred a negotiated process with the
Government regarding the human rights situation in
that country, but the Government had not made any
substantial effort to respond to the concerns of the
international community and had refused any
discussions in that regard. Member States should show
that they cared about the continued suffering of the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and support the draft resolution.
66. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that his delegation categorically rejected
the draft resolution, which had been tabled by the
European Union and Japan despite the opposition of
the overwhelming majority of Member States to
country-specific resolutions, which targeted only
developing countries. The draft resolution constituted a
politically motivated attempt led by the United States
of America to use the pretext of human rights to
eliminate the social system of his country.
67. He wondered why the invasion of sovereign
States and killing of civilians by the United States,
Japan’s crimes against humanity and the racial
discrimination and xenophobia rampant in the
European Union were not likewise called into question.
It was the height of hypocrisy for the worst human
rights abusers to talk about human rights situations in
other countries, while ignoring their own grave human
rights problems.
68. No matter how desperately they attempted to
eliminate the social system in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, its Korean-style social system,
chosen by the Korean people and defended at the cost
of their lives, would remain unshaken. His delegation
called for a recorded vote on the draft resolution and
urged all States that were against politicization,
selectivity and double standards in dealing with human
rights situations in other countries to oppose the draft
resolution on the basis of the principles of respect for
sovereignty, non-interference in domestic affairs and
justice.
69. Mr. Okuda (Japan) said that human rights should
be addressed through dialogue and cooperation with
full respect for different cultures and societies. The
human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea was, however, an exceptional case
and the current draft resolution was necessary to help
its people and others detained there, including the
Japanese citizens abducted by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
70. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continued to refuse to engage in dialogue with the
human rights mechanisms of the Organization and even
restricted emergency food assistance from international
organizations, denying its citizens’ right to food. It had
rejected the call of the General Assembly to put an end
to systematic, widespread and grave human rights
violations in its territory. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea had abducted citizens of Japan and
other sovereign countries. His Government continued
to urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
return all the abducted Japanese citizens as soon as
possible.
71. The universal periodic review was an important
tool for examining the human rights situation in allA/C.3/64/SR.44
09-61363 10
Member States, but that did not mean that country-
specific situations should be considered solely in that
forum. In the universal periodic review, Member States
were reviewed only once every four years;
furthermore, the Human Rights Council had a limited
membership, whereas the General Assembly was an
organ to which all Member States of the Organization
belonged.
72. The Human Rights Council as well as the Third
Committee should address systematic, widespread and
grave violations of human rights, within their
respective mandates, with a view to improving the
situation on the ground. The draft resolution reflected
his delegation’s belief that the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
must be improved and all abductees must be
repatriated. He urged all delegations to support the
draft resolution and called on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to take concrete measures to
improve its human rights situation, as requested in the
text.
73. Ms. Booker (Bahamas), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that the Bahamas did not
condone the wanton violation of human rights, and
recognized the right of each Member State to bring
before the General Assembly any matter which it
deemed of high importance. Her country was aware of
reports of egregious human rights violations both in the
countries that were the subject of draft resolutions and
in other Member States. The question was whether the
submission of a country-specific violation depended on
the gravity of the violations. Only three such draft
resolutions had been submitted at the current session,
as opposed to seven at the sixty-first session. States
might differ as to whether there had been any
improvement in the remaining four countries.
74. Her delegation was not convinced that country-
specific resolutions could promote meaningful
dialogue aimed at improving the situation. The
Committee should seek ways to minimize the spirit of
confrontation that currently prevailed.
75. Some delegations had argued that human rights
violations should be addressed at the Third Committee
because, unlike the Human Rights Council, it had
universal membership. That argument was flawed: the
Members of the Council were elected by the General
Assembly, itself a universal body. Human rights should
be addressed in a balanced manner, and any threat to
international security should be referred to the
appropriate body.
76. The universal periodic review was an opportunity
for States to engage in an open and transparent manner.
The State that was the subject of the draft resolution
would undergo that process at the sixth session in
December 2009. The Human Rights Council must be
given the opportunity to fulfil its mandate to review
and assess human rights situations in Member States.
The Bahamas would therefore abstain on draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.35 and on the other country-
specific resolutions.
77. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that
some Member States insisted on tabling country-
specific draft resolutions for political reasons. In so
doing, they threatened the credibility of international
political and legal mandates and weakened consensus
on human rights mechanisms. Those draft resolutions
contravened the principle of the sovereign equality of
all States, which was enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. The Human Rights Council was the
appropriate forum for consideration of such issues. Her
delegation would vote against the draft resolution.
78. Ms. Abubakar (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said
that her delegation strongly regretted the persistent
submission of country-specific draft resolutions, which
were informed by a selective approach to human rights
and contravened the principle of national sovereignty.
Such draft resolutions resulted in an overlap between
the work of the Committee and that of the Council. The
universal periodic review mechanism had been put in
place in order to avoid politicization.
79. Her delegation fully supported the resolution
adopted in 2006 at the fourteenth Summit of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which rejected
the targeting of any country for political ends, and
would vote against the draft resolution. That position
did not mean that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
condoned human rights violations.
80. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) said that human rights
should be addressed through constructive dialogue and
with respect for the principles of objectivity, national
sovereignty, non-interference, impartiality, non-selectivity
and transparency, as well as the historical, cultural and
religious characteristics of each country.
81. His delegation would vote against the draft
resolution, but urged the Democratic People’s RepublicA/C.3/64/SR.44
11 09-61363
of Korea to engage with the universal periodic review
and resolve outstanding bilateral issues with
neighbouring States.
82. Mr. Gonzáles (Costa Rica) said that owing to its
concern at the situation of human rights in the States in
question, his delegation would vote in favour of all
three country-specific resolutions. The Human Rights
Council had the main competence with regard to
human rights, and implementation of the universal
periodic review mechanism would strengthen the
Council’s credibility, as it would ensure equal
treatment for all Member States. Constructive dialogue
and cooperation should guide the way forward. The
Human Rights Council should be given the opportunity
to carry out the function for which it had been created.
83. Ms. Bhoroma (Zimbabwe) said that the human
rights agenda should focus on enhancing the enjoyment
of human rights by all, instead of smearing selected
developing States. The Committee should prefer
engagement to confrontation, and should promote all
human rights, including the right to development. Her
delegation therefore opposed country-specific
resolutions.
84. Ms. Mndebele (Swaziland) said that her country
was committed to human rights but favoured
non-interference and dialogue. Her delegation would
therefore abstain on all country-specific resolutions.
However, that position should not be interpreted as
condoning or ignoring human rights situations
anywhere in the world.
85. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that country-
specific resolutions focused selectively on countries of
the South for political purposes. Such double standards
had discredited the Commission on Human Rights. The
Council and the universal periodic review mechanism
provided a forum for genuine, objective and impartial
dialogue. Her delegation would vote against the draft
resolution.
86. Ms. Zhang Dan (China) said that all countries
should resolve their differences on human rights issues
through dialogue and cooperation, based on the
principles of equality and mutual respect. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was a
developing country which, despite facing many
economic, social and development problems in the
current food, energy and financial crisis, was making
efforts to strengthen its cooperation with the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the World
Food Programme, and was willing to undergo the
universal periodic review. In the framework of the
universal periodic review mechanism, each country’s
situation would be considered in a transparent manner.
China hoped that the international community would
pursue constructive dialogue on human rights with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
87. Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal) said that his delegation
shared the concerns expressed in the draft resolution,
and in particular in paragraph 2 concerning the
abduction of foreign nationals. However, country-
specific issues ought to be addressed comprehensively
through the universal periodic review. As a matter of
principle, his delegation would abstain.
88. Mr. Degia (Barbados) said that his delegation
was concerned at the divisive and confrontational
nature of the debate on country-specific resolutions. It
was disappointing that despite the establishment of the
Council, the Committee continued to consider such
resolutions. His delegation would therefore abstain on
all country-specific resolutions. His country’s action
should not be misconstrued as a lack of concern for
human rights. Barbados urged all States to engage in
dialogue to address human rights violations.
89. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said the draft resolution was an instrument
for the promotion of petty political interests and
strategic confrontation. It was incoherent and
illegitimate, and of no benefit to the victims of human
rights. Its authors had themselves violated human
rights, but were not subject to such resolutions. Her
delegation would vote against the draft resolution.
90. Mr. Ali (Sudan) said that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea was being unfairly singled
out. The Committee should not consider such selective
and politicized resolutions; the Council was the
appropriate forum for the issues at hand. His delegation
would vote against the draft resolution.
91. Ms. Hoang Thi Thanh Nga (Viet Nam) said that
her country opposed all human rights violations,
including abductions, and extended its sympathy to the
victims and their families. However, her delegation did
not support country-specific resolutions, which were
counterproductive, and would vote against the draft
resolution.A/C.3/64/SR.44
09-61363 12
92. At the request of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.35.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea-
Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Oman, Russian
Federation, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Barbados, Bangladesh, Benin, Bolivia,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen, Zambia.
93. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.35 was adopted by
97 votes to 19, with 65 abstentions.
94. Mr. Suárez (Colombia), speaking in explanation
of vote after the voting, said that his country was all
too well acquainted with the problem of abductions,
which it unequivocally opposed in all forms. It
demanded the immediate and unconditional release of
all abductees and renewed its call on Member States to
combat that practice.
95. Mr. Vimal (India) said that the abduction of
foreign nationals was unacceptable. His country shared
the anguish of the families and hoped for a resolution
to the issue.
96. Mr. Kleib (Indonesia) said that one of the main
reasons for reforming the United Nations human rights
mechanisms had been to allow for non-politicized and
more credible consideration of country-specific
situations. Every proposal submitted to the Committee
should be assessed on the basis of whether it made a
useful, objective contribution. His delegation had voted
against the draft resolution because it was selective and
politicized.
97. At the same time, there was an urgent need for
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
cooperate with the international community, grant
access to international aid and intensify efforts to
resolve the issue of abductions.
98. Mr. Perez (Brazil) said that his delegation noted
the concerns that had been raised regarding human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
but had abstained on the grounds that the Council had
principal responsibility for such issues. His delegation
encouraged the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to extend invitations to special mandate holders, fulfil
its obligations to the Council and implement the
recommendations of the forthcoming universal periodic
review.
99. Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh) said that his country
was concerned at the longstanding issue of abductions,A/C.3/64/SR.44
13 09-61363
and hoped for the immediate return of the abductees.
However, his delegation had abstained because it
believed that country-specific resolutions were not the
best way forward.
100. Ms. Al-Zibdeh (Jordan) said that although her
delegation had abstained, it remained concerned at the
issue of abductions, which must be addressed through
dialogue and in accordance with international
standards.
101. Mr. Vinluan (Singapore) said that his delegation
had abstained because it opposed country-specific
resolutions, which were inherently divisive. Country-
specific situations should be considered through the
universal periodic review. That position should not be
taken as an evaluation of the countries in question: his
delegation called on all States to promote human
rights.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.36*: Situation of human
rights in Myanmar
102. The Chairman drew the Committee’s attention
to the statement of programme budget implications of
the draft resolution (A/C.3/64/L.62).
103. Ms. Schlyter (Sweden) said that the draft
resolution was an important component of the
international community’s engagement with Myanmar.
It would allow the Secretary-General to continue to
follow the situation closely through the work of his
Special Adviser. That work would be crucially
important as Myanmar prepared for the 2010 national
elections. The Government must take steps to ensure a
free, fair, transparent and inclusive political process.
104. The draft resolution reiterated the international
community’s deep concern at the situation of human
rights in Myanmar. Over 2,000 prisoners of conscience
were still detained, including Daw Aung Sang Suu Kyi.
Freedom of assembly and expression were severely
restricted. A wide range of human rights violations
were perpetrated with impunity. The Government must
cooperate fully with the good offices of the Secretary-
General and with the Special Rapporteur, who would
visit in late November 2009. The Special Rapporteur’s
report (A/64/318) identified core human rights
instruments which should be implemented, including
urgent judicial reform.
105. Extensive bilateral consultations had taken place
both before and after the submission of the draft
resolution. The sponsors had appreciated the
opportunity to engage in discussions with Myanmar
throughout the process. It would have been preferable
to reach a consensus; as that had not been possible, she
urged all delegations to vote in favour of the
resolution.
106. Mr. Swe (Myanmar) said that the draft resolution
was anachronistic and flawed on a number of counts. It
was inconsistent with the trend towards a more
cooperative approach. The most intractable problems
could be overcome with tolerance, mutual
understanding and dialogue.
107. The draft resolution failed to take into account
the function of the Human Rights Council and its
universal periodic review mechanism, which was
designed to ensure that all Member States were
assessed in a just and transparent manner. Myanmar
would undergo the review in early 2011. The States
that had been reviewed had prepared their national
reports through broad consultations, and the process
was yielding positive results.
108. Most importantly, the draft resolution was
glaringly deficient and subjective. While repeating the
allegations of exiles and insurgents, it failed to note the
formidable challenges faced by the Government and
people of Myanmar, not to mention the vast
transformation taking place. The country enjoyed
unprecedented peace and stability. A new Constitution,
which had been approved by an overwhelming
majority of voters, provided for a bicameral legislature
and a presidential system. The 2010 elections would be
free and fair: citizens would have the right to form
political parties and contest the elections. It was
unconscionable to ignore those developments at such a
critical time.
109. The draft resolution was another means to
maintain political pressure on Myanmar. Such pressure,
combined with the denial of development aid by States
and international financial institutions, was unjust and
immoral. The Heads of State and Government of the
Non-Aligned Movement had stated that the
exploitation of human rights for political purposes,
including the selective targeting of individual
countries, contravened the Charter of the United
Nations. He therefore called on all Member States to
take a principled position against the draft resolution.
* Reissued for technical reasons.A/C.3/64/SR.44
09-61363 14
110. Ms. Zhang Dan (China), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that finger-pointing
would not help promote human rights. The universal
periodic review was the appropriate forum for
constructive dialogue. Moreover, the text did not
reflect the progress made by Myanmar. Her delegation
would vote against the draft resolution.
111. Ms. Abubakar (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said
that her delegation strongly regretted the persistent
submission of country-specific draft resolutions, which
were informed by a selective approach to human rights
and contravened the principle of national sovereignty.
Such draft resolutions resulted in an overlap between
the work of the Committee and that of the Council. The
universal periodic review mechanism had been put in
place in order to avoid politicization.
112. Her delegation fully supported the resolution
adopted in 2006 at the fourteenth Summit of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which rejected
the targeting of any country for political ends, and
would vote against the draft resolution. That position
did not mean that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
condoned human rights violations.
113. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) said that a more
constructive approach was needed, and the universal
periodic review was the appropriate forum for realizing
it. Consensus could not be gained through naming and
shaming. At the same time, he urged Myanmar to
continue cooperating with the good offices of the
Secretary-General and to hold free and fair elections in
2010.
114. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
lack of true dialogue had been one of the main reasons
for the failure of the Commission on Human Rights.
Consideration of human rights situations in individual
countries must focus on the universal periodic review.
His delegation would vote against the draft resolution.
115. Mr. Ali (Sudan) said that his delegation was
gravely concerned at the approach adopted, and
completely rejected the draft resolution, which was
politicized and selective.
116. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said her
delegation rejected the selective use of human rights
issues in order to interfere in the internal affairs of
States. Consensus could be gained not through
hegemony, but rather through responsible, objective
dialogue on the basis of respect for national
sovereignty. Her delegation would therefore vote
against the draft resolution.
117. Ms. Hoang Thi Thanh Nga (Viet Nam) said that
the text failed to refer to positive developments in
Myanmar. It did not reflect the comprehensive
approach of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), which was working with Myanmar to
address the root causes of social tension in the country
on the basis of respect for national sovereignty. Her
delegation would vote against the draft resolution.
118. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that country-
specific resolutions focused selectively on countries of
the South for political purposes. Such double standards
had discredited the Commission on Human Rights. The
Council and the universal periodic review mechanism
provided a forum for genuine, objective and impartial
dialogue. Her delegation would vote against the draft
resolution.
119. Ms. Méndez Romero (Venezuela) said that the
use of human rights issues as a political weapon was
unacceptable. Her delegation hoped that it would not
be repeated in future.
120. At the request of Sweden, a recorded vote was
taken on draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.36*.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Belize,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain andA/C.3/64/SR.44
15 09-61363
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Against:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei
Darussalam, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Oman, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tuvalu,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Ecuador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, Suriname, Swaziland, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen, Zambia.
121. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.36* was adopted by
92 votes to 26, with 65 abstentions.
122. Mr. Vimal (India), speaking in explanation of
vote after the voting, said that his delegation
acknowledged the steps taken by the Government of
Myanmar to promote reform in accordance with the
seven-step road map for transition to democracy. The
Secretary-General had been able to visit Myanmar, and
its Prime Minister had attended the general debate of
the General Assembly. Thousands of political prisoners
had been released. The Government was in contact
with Daw Aung Sang Suu Kyi, and was aware of the
need to achieve national reconciliation. India
welcomed the good offices of the Secretary-General
and other efforts to support the process. However,
sanctions would be counterproductive. The draft
resolution was condemnatory and not constructive, so
his delegation had been unable to support it.
123. Mr. Okuda (Japan) said that his delegation had
supported the resolution because it sent a united
message that the forthcoming elections must be
transparent and fair. At the same time, it was important
not only to censure Myanmar, but also to recognize the
progress that had been made. His delegation had
therefore suggested a number of amendments, which
regrettably had not been accepted by the sponsors. The
final text had, however, incorporated several
suggestions, for example the paragraph welcoming the
favourable response to the Special Rapporteur’s
requests to visit the country. Another was the paragraph
noting with appreciation recent contact between the
Government of Myanmar and Daw Aung Sang Suu
Kyi.
124. Japan welcomed recent positive steps, including
the release of over 100 political prisoners, and
expected that all parties would be allowed to
participate in the forthcoming elections. Japan was
considering gradually expanding its humanitarian and
human resource development assistance.
125. Mr. Kleib (Indonesia) said that his delegation
was steadfast in its support for the good offices of the
Secretary-General, and welcomed the visit of the
Special Adviser. He called on the Government of
Myanmar to release all political prisoners, including
Daw Aung Sang Suu Kyi, and to implement the seven-
step road map. A consensus resolution would have sent
a strong message and helped further national
reconciliation. His delegation supported some aspects
of the draft resolution. However, because it favoured a
constructive approach to the question, it had abstained.
126. Mr. Perez (Brazil) said that his delegation was
concerned at the situation in Myanmar, and in
particular at the issues referred to in the Secretary-
General’s report. The release of Daw Aung Sang Suu
Kyi and her full participation in the 2010 elections
must be addressed. His delegation took note of the
memorandum submitted by the delegation of Myanmar
(A/C.3/64/2), which referred in particular to that
country’s obligations towards the Human Rights
Council. The latter had principal responsibility for the
consideration of human rights issues. His delegation
encouraged Myanmar to engage fully with the
universal periodic review, and took note of the steps
taken to cooperate with United Nations institutions.A/C.3/64/SR.44
09-61363 16
127. Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh) said that his country
was prepared to extend any necessary support to
Myanmar. His delegation welcomed the fact that the
Government of Myanmar had agreed to allow the
Special Adviser to conduct a follow-up visit.
Thousands of prisoners had been released on
humanitarian grounds over the previous ten months,
and the Special Adviser had been able to meet with
Daw Aung Sang Suu Kyi. The Government of
Myanmar was committed to holding free and fair
elections. His delegation had voted against the draft
resolution, which risked being counter-productive.
128. Ms. Andamo (Thailand) said that her delegation
had abstained because human rights should not be
approached through country-specific resolutions, but
rather through the universal periodic review. The recent
summit of ASEAN had underscored the need for
national reconciliation and free and fair elections in
Myanmar. Thailand strongly supported the good offices
of the Secretary-General and the work of the Special
Adviser. The future of Myanmar was in the hands of its
own people.
129. Ms. Horsington (Australia) said her delegation
strongly supported the focus of the draft resolution on
human rights and free, fair and credible elections. All
political prisoners should be released, and all players
should engage in a genuine reform process. Her
delegation commended the delegation of Sweden for
conducting transparent consultations, and welcomed
the decision of the delegation of Myanmar not to
submit a no-action motion.
Statements made in exercise of the right of reply
130. Mr. Preston (United Kingdom), responding to
the comments made at the forty-third meeting by the
representative of Argentina, said that the position of
the United Kingdom on the Falkland Islands was well
known. His country was in no doubt regarding its
sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. There would be
no negotiations on the issue unless and until the
Falkland Islanders so wished.
131. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that Japan was in no position to lecture
other countries on human rights, least of all Korea.
Japan had abducted 8.4 million Koreans, killed
1 million, and forced 200,000 Korean women and girls
into sexual slavery.
132. A number of delegations had referred to the
abduction issue. They had been lied to by the
delegation of Japan. His country had made the facts
clear on several occasions. The abduction of little more
than 10 Japanese citizens paled into insignificance in
comparison with the grave crimes committed against
Korea by Japan. Nevertheless, his Government had
addressed the issue with great sincerity and generosity.
At the request of the Japanese authorities, a nationwide
investigation had been launched. The Government of
Japan had been informed that 13 of its citizens had
been abducted in the 1970s and early 1980s. The
circumstances had been fully explained, and the
perpetrators had been punished. The five abductees
who were still alive had been allowed to return to
Japan with their families and children. His Government
had expressed regret at the highest level. It had done
everything it could, and considered the matter settled.
133. Mr. Okuda (Japan) said that the statement made
by the representative of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea did not reflect the consultations
between the two countries. The Government of Japan
had identified 17 Japanese citizens who had been
abducted. Only 5 had returned; the remaining 12 had
not been accounted for. Moreover, there were other
cases in which the possibility of abduction could not be
excluded.
134. In August 2008, the two countries had agreed on
the purposes and modalities of a comprehensive
investigation. In accordance with that agreement, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should
establish a committee with the necessary authority and
launch a new investigation. However, no tangible
action had been taken.
135. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that only 13 individuals had been
abducted. He did not know where the figure of 17 came
from. However, according to some reports in Japan,
8 individuals who were believed to have been abducted
had since reappeared in Japan.
136. The agreement had stated that if his Government
organized an investigation and informed Japan of the
results, Japan would lift its sanctions against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. His
Government had fulfilled those requirements, but the
sanctions had been intensified. Japan should refrain
from continuing to use the issue for political purposes.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.