United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.23
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
26 December 2007
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-56053 (E)
*0756053*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 23rd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 24 October 2007, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Later: Mr. Gibbons (Vice-Chairman) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ireland)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/62/SR.23
07-56053 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/62/36, 369 and 464)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/62/183, 207, 212, 214,
218, 222, 225, 227, 254, 255, 265, 280, 286-289,
293, 298, 304 and 317)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/62/213, 223, 263, 275, 313, 318, 354 and 498)
1. Mr. Dugard (Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967), introducing his report (A/62/275), said
that the situation of human rights in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory had worsened since the report’s
publication on 17 August 2007. Gaza remained an
imprisoned society as a result of the complete closure
of the main crossing points and 80 per cent of its
population were now living below the poverty
threshold. Since Israel refused to recognize Gaza as an
occupied territory, Israeli banks had discontinued
dealings with banks in Gaza, a move which had serious
consequences for its inhabitants, who used the shekel
as their currency. There had been some improvements
in the West Bank since Hamas had seized power in
Gaza (release of almost 350 Palestinian prisoners,
payment of some of the tax revenue due to the
Palestinian Authority, relaxation of travel restrictions
in the Jordan Valley and granting of 3,500 residence
permits to Palestinians), but the overall situation, in
particular its humanitarian aspects, continued to
worsen (increase in the numbers of checkpoints and
roadblocks (currently 571), military incursions and
arrests and murders of militants, continued
construction of the wall (which was being rerouted in
the Hebron area, increasing the amount of Palestinian
land in the closed zone to 13 per cent from the 10.2 per
cent indicated in the report) and continued expansion
of settlements, with new housing being built and
further land confiscated). The problem of prisoners was
more acute than ever: there were some 11,000
Palestinians in Israeli jails.
2. Having reviewed the situation since the
publication of his report, he turned to the report’s
conclusions on three main points: the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, which was
seriously threatened by the dispute between Fatah and
Hamas; the consequences of 40 years of occupation of
the Palestinian Territory, concerning which he would
request a new Advisory Opinion from the International
Court of Justice; and the role of the United Nations in
the protection of human rights in the Palestinian
Territory. On the last point, he questioned the role of
the Quartet, which reported to the Security Council but
had not been established under a resolution of the
Security Council or the General Assembly.
3. Since the Quartet was guided by the political will
of its most powerful member and paid little attention to
the human rights of the Palestinians, it must be asked
whether the best interests of the United Nations, which
was responsible for protecting those rights, were really
served by remaining in the Quartet. He was calling for
a serious debate on the issue among all United Nations
stakeholders: if the Secretary-General was unable to
persuade the Quartet to adopt an even-handed approach
to the Israel/Palestine dispute, which took account of
fundamental Palestinian rights, he suggested that he
should consider withdrawing the United Nations from
the Quartet.
4. Mr. Mansour (Observer for Palestine) thanked
the Special Rapporteur on behalf of the Palestinian
people and its leaders for the frankness of his report,
his sincerity and his description of the real situation,
which unfortunately risked exposing him to much
criticism. He assured the Special Rapporteur of the
cooperation of the Palestinian people in his ongoing
work.
5. Ms. Schonmann (Israel) vigorously disputed the
objectivity and impartiality of the Special Rapporteur’s
report. The problem lay in the very nature of his
mandate, unchanged since 1993, which required him to
examine violations of human rights allegedly
committed by Israel without considering those
committed by Palestinians. The report was a caricature:
it presented a very simplistic view of the situation and
contained a number of factual and legal errors and
distortions of reality, as well as using inflammatory
language (referring, for example, to the “arrest” of
Israeli corporal Gilad Shalit). The Special Rapporteur
also cited at length a report published in 2006 by the
non-governmental organization Peace Now regarding
land ownership in the West Bank, but failed to note
that Peace Now itself had retracted its report because it
contained factual errors.A/C.3/62/SR.23
3 07-56053
6. Beyond the report’s errors of fact, the Special
Rapporteur had departed from the United Nations
doctrine of unequivocally condemning terrorism,
regardless of the circumstances in which it was
committed. By advancing the position that terrorism
was a relative concept, he demonstrated a deliberate
blindness to the glorification and perpetration of acts
of terrorism by certain Palestinian groups. He
advanced arguments that legitimized acts of terrorism
directed at innocent civilians and compared Palestinian
terrorists with resistance fighters throughout history. A
cursory look at the Hamas Charter, calling for the
annihilation of Israel might help to reveal the lack of
any relativity in its vision of the right to self-
determination; it was no surprise therefore that the
official spokesman of Hamas had wholeheartedly
welcomed the Special Rapporteur’s latest report.
7. The report struck a blow at the current
preparations for peace talks by reflecting an approach
that sought to undermine core humanitarian principles,
including the principle of self-defence, and could be
regarded only as a step backwards in the protection of
human rights, not just in the region but throughout the
world.
8. Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Observer for Palestine),
speaking on a point of order, said that the statement by
the representative of Israel had been unacceptably
long.
9. Ms. Mtshali (South Africa) said that the
Palestinian people had a right to self-determination, a
principle that was enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. The question of Palestine, which had
been on the agenda for more than 60 years, remained
unresolved. Her Government was very worried by
Israel’s continuing occupation of the Palestinian
Territory and recalled that any solution to the conflict
would necessarily involve the creation of an
independent State of Palestine, having East Jerusalem
as its capital and living side by side with Israel, with
both States enjoying secure and internationally
recognized borders. She asked the Special Rapporteur
what role the United Nations ought to be playing in the
Quartet with regard to human rights violations and how
the Organization could be more effective in securing
Palestinian self-determination and the establishment of
an independent State, given that he felt that the Quartet
did not speak for the majority of the Member States.
She also asked whether there was a need for a new
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the legal consequences of prolonged occupation and
what steps the international community should take to
improve the worrying situation of Palestinian prisoners
in Israel and to ensure that Israel, the occupying Power,
respected the Fourth Geneva Convention.
10. Mr. Queiros (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that Israel and the Palestinian
Authority must respect internationally established
human rights and fundamental freedoms. He asked the
Special Rapporteur what measures he thought the two
parties should take as soon as possible to improve the
human rights situation in the occupied territories and
what the international community could do to improve
the situation. He shared the Special Rapporteur’s
opinion that the political rift between Gaza and the
West Bank that had occurred in June 2007 when Hamas
had come to power had had a negative impact on the
human rights situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The European Union was opposed to the
division of the Palestinian territories and was
concerned at the continuing deterioration of the human
rights situation in Gaza, where it continued to provide
humanitarian aid to the population. He asked the
Special Rapporteur what he thought the international
community should do to promote national
reconciliation, strengthen Palestinian institutions in
Gaza and improve the humanitarian situation there.
Referring to the considerable number of deaths in Gaza
since Hamas had taken power, he asked what measures
the Special Rapporteur believed should be used to
combat impunity there. Concerning the improvement
of the situation in the West Bank since Hamas had
come to power in Gaza, he asked the Special
Rapporteur whether he had any additional information
on other measures taken to improve the situation.
11. Mr. Al-Saif (Kuwait) said that he had noted with
regret and concern the Special Rapporteur’s assessment
of the human rights situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Apart from the proposal to
request a new Advisory Opinion from the International
Court of Justice, he would like to know what other
measures the Special Rapporteur advocated for ending
Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian Territory.
12. Mr. Edrees (Egypt) said that the vital, cross-
cutting issue of human rights could not be viewed in
isolation from the rest of the question of Palestine. He
stressed that human rights were enshrined in
international norms and that there was no room for
compromise as to their application. He was pleasedA/C.3/62/SR.23
07-56053 4
that the Special Rapporteur had referred to the
comments made by the former Envoy to the Quartet in
his end-of-mission report and hoped that the United
Nations would play a more active role in the Quartet.
His Government was concerned at the information in
the report concerning the expansion of Israeli
settlements, which were illegal and threatened the
possibility of lasting peace. He wished to know more
about the political repercussions of the situation
created by those settlements.
13. Mr. Al-Shami (Yemen) said that the Special
Rapporteur had shown courage in describing in his
report the violations of Palestinians’ human rights in
the occupied territories since 1967; he hoped that
action would be taken on his conclusions.
14. Mr. Abdeen (Sudan) said that the report
described the situation in the occupied territories
objectively and asked the Special Rapporteur to point
to any measures that would enable the United Nations
to force Israel to apply the resolutions on Palestinian
human rights in particular and the question of Palestine
in general.
15. Mr. Dugard (Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967) said that “terrorism” was indeed a relative
concept. Two individuals accused of terrorist activities
had subsequently become prime ministers of Israel.
Terrorism must be condemned from a moral and legal
standpoint, but there was a danger that focusing on it
too much might result in the real issues being ignored.
16. Replying to the representative of South Africa, he
noted that the Oslo Accords had not lived up to
Palestinian expectations because they had failed to take
into account the issue of the human rights of the
Palestinian people. The Quartet should put more
emphasis on human rights. Requesting a further
Advisory Opinion from the International Court of
Justice might make it possible to determine whether
Israel was still occupying Gaza and to identify more
clearly the legal aspects of the prolonged occupation of
the Palestinian territories. With regard to Palestinian
prisoners, according to humanitarian law, they ought to
be imprisoned in the occupied territories, not in Israel.
The Israeli Government must comply with its
obligations in that regard.
17. Replying to the representative of Portugal, he
said that in order for human rights to be respected in
the occupied territories, the problem of the separation
wall and the increase in the number of checkpoints and
border crossings needed to be solved urgently. As far as
national reconciliation was concerned, the United
Nations should act as a go-between in trying to bring
the two sides closer together. The international
community must give its attention to the serious
allegations of human rights violations in Gaza and the
West Bank.
18. Replying to the representative of Kuwait, he said
that the Third Committee should recommend to the
General Assembly that it consider asking the
International Court of Justice for an Advisory Opinion
on the legal consequences of the prolonged occupation
of the Palestinian territories.
19. Replying to the Egyptian representative’s
question about settlements, he noted that even though
the Israeli Government was claiming that it had put a
freeze on the establishment of new settlements, work
on them was continuing, funded and supported by the
State.
20. Replying to the representative of Yemen, he noted
that the Quartet could contribute to the implementation
of United Nations resolutions by insisting that the
Israeli Government comply with its international
obligations. In its statements, however, the Quartet had
all too often criticized the Palestinian Authority while
ignoring the serious human rights violations committed
by Israel.
21. Mr. Ramadan (Lebanon) endorsed the Special
Rapporteur’s conclusions and recommendations. The
report admittedly contained repetitions, but those only
served to demonstrate the persistence of Israeli
practices. He wondered whether killings and
systematic violations could be deemed to constitute a
policy and whether the fact that the silent majority
closed their eyes to those human rights violations
implicated them legally.
22. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that his
Government shared the international community’s
concerns about the hardships faced by Palestinians. It
disagreed strongly with the criticism levelled at the
Quartet, of which the United Nations was a member
and whose goal was to advance Israeli-Palestinian
peace and to set normative parameters for acceptable
action by the parties. The suggestion that the United
Nations should consider withdrawing from the Quartet
was irresponsible. The Special Rapporteur was
implying that the Quartet had no legitimacy, when inA/C.3/62/SR.23
5 07-56053
fact the Security Council has endorsed its efforts to
advance peace on a number of occasions.
23. His Government was troubled by the Special
Rapporteur’s superficial treatment of the complicated
and illegitimate situation in Gaza, where Hamas had
seized power violently, and strongly disagreed that
Fatah had seized power by similar means in the West
Bank. Such accusations could only further complicate
an already difficult situation.
24. His Government had a long-standing commitment
to improving the lives of Palestinians living in the West
Bank and Gaza and to the creation of a Palestinian
State. Since 1993, it had delivered more than
US$ 1.7 billion in aid to the West Bank and Gaza to
combat poverty, create jobs, improve education, build
roads and water systems, construct and equip medical
clinics and promote good governance. In 2007, it had
been the largest bilateral contributor of assistance to
the Palestinian people, spending over US$ 204 million.
25. His Government was concerned that the Special
Rapporteur had devoted no more than a passing
reference to acts of terror directed towards Israeli
citizens. His implication that terrorism could be
justified under any circumstances was disturbing.
There could be no peace until there was an end to
violence. The Special Rapporteur’s allusions to
apartheid were also inappropriate. While his
Government regretted the loss of all innocent life, both
Palestinian and Israeli, there was a clear distinction
between military operations by the Israel Defense
Forces and the deliberate targeting of civilians by
terrorist organizations operating in the West Bank and
Gaza.
26. He believed that seeking a further Advisory
Opinion from the International Court of Justice would
be inconsistent with Security Council and General
Assembly support for the peace process. His
Government was attempting to advance bilateral talks
between the parties in preparation for the international
meeting to be held later in the year. At a time when
efforts were being made to reach a solution, the Special
Rapporteur should have focused on objective reporting
rather than producing a biased report that detracted
from efforts to advance peace.
27. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) endorsed the
Special Rapporteur’s opinions and commended the
efforts that he was making to fulfil his mandate. As a
national of a country that had long practised racial
discrimination and apartheid, he was well placed to
promote the dialogue needed to settle the Arab-Israeli
conflict.
28. Ms. Sutikno (Indonesia) said that the present
year was no cause for celebration, marking as it did the
fortieth anniversary of the occupation of Palestinian
territories. The Palestinians would remain the primary
victims of the occupation for as long as it continued.
She welcomed the release of 225 Palestinian prisoners
and the amnesty for 175 Fatah militants, as well as the
remittance of $119 million of Palestinian tax funds to
the Palestinian Authority. The violation of human
rights had a serious impact on the situation in the West
Bank. She endorsed the Special Rapporteur’s
suggestion that the International Court of Justice
should be asked to give an Advisory Opinion and
wished to know what that Opinion would achieve. She
also wished to know what approach the Special
Rapporteur might adopt in order to contribute to the
work of the Quartet, particularly with regard to the
inclusion of human rights aspects.
29. Mr. Sergiya (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) welcomed
the conclusions and recommendations contained in the
report and asked about new mechanisms or measures
that would help to end the occupation and enable the
Palestinians to exercise their right to self-
determination, which was recognized by the United
Nations and all other international organizations.
30. Mr. Badji (Senegal) said that the report laid bare
the human rights situation in the occupied territories. It
valuably drew the attention of the international
community to its responsibilities by calling upon it to
protect the rights of Palestinians, restore justice and
respect international law by condemning the Israeli
occupation and acting on the Advisory Opinion. He
hoped that the Committee would follow up the report
and that the international community would take into
account the Special Rapporteur’s recommendations.
31. Ms. Medal (Nicaragua) welcomed the
recommendations contained in the report, which were
extremely pertinent, particularly concerning the role of
the United Nations. The Palestinian people should be
permitted to exercise their right to self-determination
and the violations to which they were subjected should
be brought to an end.
32. Mr. Ferrer (Cuba) said that his Government had
always supported the cause of the Palestinian people.
His delegation looked forward to further details fromA/C.3/62/SR.23
07-56053 6
the Special Rapporteur concerning the impact of the
separation wall on the ability of the Palestinians to
exercise their fundamental rights.
33. Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Observer for Palestine)
said that the Special Rapporteur, in common with other
international entities, had based himself on
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law in considering the situation in
Palestine. His detailed factual report amply
demonstrated that the Israeli Government was violating
the human rights of Palestinians. The time had come to
identify what the international community, in particular
the Security Council and civil society, could do to end
that situation.
34. Mr. Dugard (Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967) said that the 2004 Advisory Opinion had
been confined to the question of the legality or
illegality of the separation wall being built within
Palestinian territory. It was important to consider all
aspects of the occupation, particularly given that it had
been accompanied by colonialism, which was in
violation of the obligations by which Israel was bound.
He noted that the Advisory Opinion could provide
legitimacy for United Nations action on the subject.
35. Replying to the questions by the Indonesian
representative, he reiterated his complaint that the
Quartet did not take the human rights content of the
situation sufficiently seriously.
36. Replying to the issue raised by the Libyan
representative, he said that any peaceful settlement of
the Palestinian question should inevitably take into
account human rights.
37. Replying to the remarks by the Observer for
Palestine, he said that States and civil society alike
should play a more pro-active role and that the Quartet
should devote more attention to human rights.
38. Replying to the comments by the United States
representative, he noted that the United States
Government had imposed its will on the other members
of the Quartet, who had indicated that they were
prepared to accept the Advisory Opinion. On the
subject of terrorism, he did not wish to underestimate
its importance but felt that it could be used as a
distraction. He disputed that the separation wall was
being built for security purposes; it was clearly
intended to enclose Israeli settlements within Israel.
Lastly, although it was politically incorrect to suggest
that some Israeli practices in the occupied territories
were akin to apartheid, it could not be ignored that
many of those practices in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem discriminated on racial grounds against
Palestinians.
39. Mr. Pinheiro (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar), introducing his
report (A/62/223), said that he had not been granted
access to Myanmar since November 2003 but that he
continued closely to follow events in the country. As in
the past, his report had been shared with the Permanent
Mission of Myanmar in Geneva, many of whose
suggestions had been accommodated.
40. Since the submission of his report, tragic events
had been taking place in Myanmar. On 15 August
2007, the Government had increased the retail price of
fuel, leading to peaceful protests by the population,
whose standard of living had been severely curtailed
over the years. From 18 to 30 September, large
demonstrations had been led by monks, with the
participation of the ‘88 Generation Student Group,
parliamentarians, religious minorities and citizens,
including women and children. From 26 to
28 September, the security forces had repressed
peaceful demonstrators with the use of excessive force,
killing and seriously injuring a number of
demonstrators and making wide-scale arrests. Many of
those demonstrators had not yet been released and he
continued to receive alarming reports of deaths in
custody and disappearances. He was also gravely
concerned at the use of non-law-enforcement officials
and non-State armed groups alongside the security
forces.
41. He joined his fellow special procedure mandate-
holders in calling on the Myanmar authorities
immediately and unconditionally to release the
detainees and political prisoners, including the General
Secretary of the National League for Democracy
(NLD), Aung San Suu Kyi, who had been in detention
or under house arrest for 12 years. He nevertheless
welcomed the appointment of a liaison officer tasked
with starting a dialogue with the NLD General
Secretary and hoped that such a dialogue would begin
without further delay.
42. States of the region had an outstanding role to
play in the process towards upholding the principles of
democracy and rule of law in Myanmar, butA/C.3/62/SR.23
7 07-56053
coordination of the different approaches among
Member States was urgently needed. He proposed a
strategic dialogue with the Government of Myanmar
aimed at reconciling the army with the people and was
encouraged by the expressions of deep concern issued
by key international and regional actors, such as the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
the United Nations Security Council.
43. He welcomed the access provided to Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, by
the Government of Myanmar and called upon it to
continue cooperating with him. Under Human Rights
Council resolution S-5/1, he himself had been
mandated to assess the current human rights situation
in Myanmar, including by seeking an urgent visit to the
country. He was pleased to report that the Government
of Myanmar had recently confirmed its agreement to
such a visit, during which he proposed to gather
information, testimonies and data, as well as verify the
allegations of ongoing human rights abuses in
Myanmar.
44. Since the recent wave of repression, he had
received numerous worrying reports concerning
detainees, detention conditions and night raids
conducted during curfew hours. Individuals had also
reportedly been charged and sentenced by special
courts. At the current stage, it was difficult to provide
accurate numbers of persons killed, arrested or still in
detention, as the figures provided by the authorities
perhaps underestimated the real figures.
45. In accordance with Human Rights Council
resolution S-5/1, he urged the authorities of Myanmar
to secure the physical and psychological integrity of all
detainees; reveal the whereabouts of individuals,
particularly missing persons; ensure immediate access
by the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and other humanitarian personnel to all
detainees; take steps for the unconditional release of all
detainees; grant amnesty to people already sentenced
and drop prosecutions already under way; conduct
independent and thorough investigations into killings
and enforced disappearances; engage in a constructive
dialogue with the Human Rights Council and its
special procedures; and take steps to alleviate the
economic hardship of the great majority of the
population and introduce serious reforms.
46. The persecution of members of the opposition
and human rights defenders showed that many
obstacles to a genuine transition remained, despite the
laying down of principles for a new constitution by the
National Convention on 3 September 2007. The arrest
and detention of several political leaders and the severe
and sustained restrictions on the exercise of
fundamental freedoms could only be detrimental to
Myanmar’s stability. There would be no progress in
political transition until ordinary citizens were able to
express their views and discontent peacefully and in
public.
47. The progressive deterioration of the economic
and social situation and the hidden war that had
decimated generations of Karen, Shan and other
minority groups were also major obstacles.
48. It was a further matter of concern that in order to
find out what was really happening in their country and
the rest of the world, citizens of Myanmar were forced
to rely on sources of information that were prohibited
by the national authorities and that the Internet was
censored and electronic mail services restricted.
49. Mr. Thaung Tun (Myanmar) paid tribute to
Mr. Pinheiro in his capacity as Independent Expert
directing the Secretary-General’s in-depth study on
violence against children. However, his report on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar (A/62/223) was
less than objective. To his credit, the Special
Rapporteur acknowledged, in paragraph 62 of the
report, that he had not been able to verify the accuracy
of the allegations received owing to the fact that he had
been unable to visit the country in recent years.
Unsubstantiated allegations had no place in the report
of a Special Rapporteur who was aware of the complex
situation in the country and could obtain reliable
information from various sources.
50. He recalled that the Special Rapporteur had made
six visits to Myanmar, during which the country’s
authorities had extended their full cooperation to him,
allowing him to travel the length and breadth of the
country to witness at first hand the palpable changes
taking place, even in remote areas, thanks to the
restoration of peace and stability. The Special
Rapporteur had also had the opportunity to meet with
the country’s leaders and with representatives of
political parties and of armed groups that had returned
to the legal fold, as well as to visit prisons and
interview detainees.
51. Cooperation with the United Nations was a
cornerstone of the Government’s foreign policy and itA/C.3/62/SR.23
07-56053 8
was ready to receive the Special Rapporteur again in
November. It had also agreed to a visit by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
that same month. In addition, several other senior
United Nations officials had already visited Myanmar
and the United Nations country team was in a position
to provide balanced and objective reports on the
situation in the country.
52. In recent months and weeks, Myanmar had
become an emotive issue. However, the international
community must be able to rise above the fray and
discern the true situation. Peaceful protests had been
sullied by political activists and rabble rousers, but the
Government had exercised restraint. The situation
would not have deteriorated to such an extent had it not
been for the subversive acts carried out by political
opportunists with foreign support. One political party,
in collusion with Western embassies, had even
disseminated malicious news.
53. Normality had been restored in the country and
the curfew on certain urban areas had been completely
lifted. Following the visit of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General from 29 September to 2 October
2007, the Government had appointed a Minister to
liaise with Aung San Suu Kyi, a 54-member committee
had been established to draft a new constitution, the
Special Envoy and the Special Rapporteur had been
invited to visit Myanmar in November 2007 and 2,677
demonstrators, who had been briefly detained for
questioning, had been released. Further releases would
follow.
54. He welcomed the fact that the Special Rapporteur
had acknowledged that important changes were taking
place in the country, but regretted that he had
questioned the viability of the National Convention,
which had in fact completed its work. Only the
Government and people of Myanmar could fashion
their own destiny.
55. Although time constraints made it impossible for
him to refute all the unsubstantiated allegations
contained in the report, he could not let the outrageous
allegations of human rights violations, particularly
sexual violence and recruitment of child soldiers, pass
without comment. He wished to reaffirm that it was not
his Government’s policy to recruit child soldiers and
that an action plan to prevent their recruitment was in
place, as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict had
confirmed.
56. When the Special Rapporteur visited Myanmar in
November for the seventh time at the Government’s
invitation, he would be accorded full cooperation in
carrying out his important mission. His delegation
hoped that in the report to be submitted to the next
session of the Human Rights Council, the Special
Rapporteur would acknowledge the developments
taking place in the country and make fair and
pragmatic recommendations.
57. Ms. Martins (Portugal), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that the situation in Myanmar
had evolved since the previous report, but not in the
right direction. The European Union was deeply
concerned and urged the Government of Myanmar to
cooperate with United Nations mechanisms, in
particular the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Myanmar. She wished to know the
status of preparations for the Special Rapporteur’s
visit, as well as the exact date of that visit and its main
objectives. In his report, the Special Rapporteur
recommended ways and means of addressing
urgently — and with pragmatism — the issue of
political prisoners.
58. She asked whether the Government of Myanmar
had acted on that recommendation, whether updated
information on the total number of prisoners following
the arrest of many peaceful demonstrators had been
provided and how the Special Rapporteur intended to
take account of those new detentions in his
recommendations.
59. Women in Myanmar had been subjected to
serious and repeated violations of their rights,
including sexual violence in the context of armed
conflict and military operations, as well as acts of
discrimination. Moreover, they were bearing the brunt
of the deterioration of the economic and social
situation in the country. She noted that, in his report,
the Special Rapporteur had called on the Government
of Myanmar to follow up on the recommendations and
concluding observations adopted by the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. She
wondered what additional measures should be taken to
facilitate the realization in Myanmar of women’s basic
rights.
60. Mr. Poniatowski (France) associated himself
fully with the statement made by Portugal on behalf ofA/C.3/62/SR.23
9 07-56053
the European Union and reiterated his Government’s
solidarity with the Burmese people in their peaceful
struggle for human rights and democracy. The brutality
with which the regime had suppressed its own people
had horrified the world and while the number of
fatalities and injuries was unknown, it was probably
much higher than the official government figure.
61. He thanked the Special Rapporteur for the efforts
that he had been making for a number of years to bring
about a genuine improvement in the situation of human
rights in Myanmar and for briefing the Committee and
emphasized the urgent need for the authorities to give a
definite response to the requests made by the Security
Council on 11 October on the basis, inter alia, of the
outcome of the special session of the Human Rights
Council held on 2 October. He welcomed the fact that
the Government had authorized the Special Rapporteur,
ICRC and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to visit the country. It was in fact vital to maintain
international pressure on the regime in order to
encourage it to end the repression and engage in a real
political dialogue with all stakeholders, including Aung
San Suu Kyi, who should be given freedom of
movement.
62. His delegation hoped that the Special Rapporteur
would be accorded all necessary cooperation and
complete freedom of movement and would be able to
meet representatives of civil society, including political
prisoners and human rights defenders. It called for the
urgent release of all political detainees and the lifting
of all restrictions on the peaceful exercise of
fundamental freedoms and would remain active on
their behalf.
63. Lastly, noting that the Special Rapporteur had
stressed in his report the need to provide international
technical assistance to the country, he suggested that
the High Commissioner for Human Rights might help
to define the parameters of such assistance, in
cooperation with the Burmese authorities. He asked
how his Government could assist the Special
Rapporteur following his visit to Myanmar and what
the Special Rapporteur expected Member States to do
to help the country embark, at the earliest opportunity,
on the road to democracy, which, ultimately, was the
only road possible.
64. Mr. Thaung Tun (Myanmar), speaking on a
point of order, asked the Chairman to request speakers
to use the official name of his country in their
statements. As the item under discussion was human
rights, the right of each Member State to choose the
name by which it wished to be called should be
respected.
65. Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) thanked the Special
Rapporteur for finding the right words to describe a
situation that was distressing to the international
community in more ways than one. The images coming
out of Myanmar gave cause for concern and testified to
a tragic situation that must be remedied. His delegation
hoped that the urgent measures called for by the
international community would be taken in the coming
weeks.
66. While the Third Committee was not a court, it did
expect the Government of Myanmar, as it would any
other Government, to be able to respond to its people’s
appeals and to respect freedom of expression, a basic
right that was recognized in the country’s Constitution.
67. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) thanked and
congratulated the Special Rapporteur, whose mandate
was absolutely essential and must be maintained. He
hoped that the Myanmar authorities would cooperate
with the Special Rapporteur on his forthcoming visit.
68. Recalling the many arrests made after the latest
demonstrations and the reports of deplorable
conditions of detention and ill-treatment inflicted on
persons in preventive detention in Myanmar, he said
that his Government wished to know what measures
the Special Rapporteur would propose to the national
authorities in that regard on his forthcoming visit.
69. Ms. Lowe (New Zealand) thanked the Special
Rapporteur for his report and the fresh information that
he had just presented. Her delegation had sponsored
the Human Rights Council resolution calling for a
special session on Myanmar and had supported the
final resolution of the special session, requesting the
Special Rapporteur to visit Myanmar and to report to
the Council at its next session.
70. Noting that the Government of Myanmar had
authorized the Special Rapporteur and the Secretary-
General’s Special Envoy for Myanmar, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, to visit the country, she hoped that the
decision signalled the Government’s willingness to
cooperate with the international community. In his
report, the Special Envoy had made specific
recommendations to the Government of Myanmar withA/C.3/62/SR.23
07-56053 10
a view to ending the tensions and the serious and
flagrant human rights violations against the population.
71. Mr. Shinyo (Japan) thanked the Special
Rapporteur for his presentation and his tireless efforts
to carry out his mandate and expressed support for his
mission and activities. He was pleased that the
Government of Myanmar had authorized the Special
Rapporteur to visit the country and would follow the
mission’s progress closely.
72. He strongly deplored the decision of the
Government of Myanmar to use force against peaceful
demonstrators, which had resulted inter alia in the
death of a Japanese citizen. He hoped that the
Government would accept and implement in good faith
the provisions of the resolution adopted unanimously
by the Human Rights Council at its special session on
2 October and the statement issued by the President of
the Security Council on 11 October.
73. He asked the Special Rapporteur what impact the
work of the National Convention on the drafting of a
new constitution, which had concluded in September
2007, and the measures taken by the Government of
Myanmar against peaceful demonstrators had had on
the human rights situation and democratization in
Myanmar. While recognizing that human rights were
an indivisible whole, he asked what issues the Special
Rapporteur would emphasize on his forthcoming visit.
74. Mr. Pinheiro (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar) noted that the
announcement of his forthcoming visit to Myanmar
was very recent and that the dates would be set in
consultation with the Government of Myanmar and the
Secretary-General.
75. Concerning the number of political prisoners, he
could not give a precise figure but, according to some
reports, 2,677 individuals detained during the latest
crisis had been released and further releases were
expected. He would probably have more accurate
information after his visit.
76. With regard to women, the Government of
Myanmar had submitted a report to the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. It
was essential that women’s rights should be protected
under the new Constitution and that humanitarian
assistance should be gender-specific.
77. Replying to the questions by the representatives
of France and Switzerland concerning conditions of
detention, he noted that the visits that ICRC had been
making for years were already benefiting both the
Government and detainees and that the contacts
between the Government and ICRC were constructive.
He hoped that ICRC would be able to resume its visits
to prisoners of conscience. Replying to the question by
the representative of France as to the form that his
Government’s assistance should take, he said that the
most effective action that both France and the other
members of the Security Council could take was to
continue to do what they had been doing for the past 10
months, in order to facilitate the transition process in
Myanmar.
78. Replying to the representative of Guinea-Bissau,
he expressed the hope that the Government of
Myanmar would soon recognize that freedom of
expression and freedom of association were essential
for the transition to democracy.
79. Replying to the representative of New Zealand,
he pointed out that he was only just beginning the
preparations for his visit to Myanmar, in cooperation
with the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
various colleagues and the Myanmar authorities. On
previous occasions, he had enjoyed the full cooperation
of the authorities.
80. Replying to the representative of Japan, he said
that his visits had a very specific goal. He wanted to be
able to give the Human Rights Council a clear,
objective and detailed picture of the crisis after hearing
from both the protesters and the Government.
81. His reports always took the Government’s views
more fully into account when he was able to visit the
country. He did not condemn the work of the National
Convention but rather, like the Secretary-General and
his predecessor, felt that it should encompass a broader
range of views. Lastly, it was his understanding that, in
Chinese, the word “crisis” meant “opportunity”. He
was convinced that all crises opened up opportunities.
82. Ms. Patscher (Germany), associating herself
with the statement made by the representative of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union, noted that
the Special Rapporteur’s report mentioned freedom of
the press, freedom of expression, freedom of assembly
and freedom of association. Given that both the people
of Myanmar and the international community were
obtaining their information on the situation in the
country from sources that were banned by the
authorities, she asked what could be done to ensureA/C.3/62/SR.23
11 07-56053
access to those media for the inhabitants of Myanmar
and to persuade the authorities to stop censoring and
banning them. Noting that forced labour was still
practised, she requested information on cooperation
between ILO and the Myanmar authorities in that
regard and on the number of successful complaints.
83. Ms. Yarlett (Australia) welcomed the Special
Rapporteur’s forthcoming visit to Myanmar and urged
the Government to lend him its full cooperation. She
was appalled by the recent repression of peaceful
demonstrations and concerned that many people had
been arrested. She called for their release and asked
how the international community could encourage the
Government to improve the treatment of detainees.
84. Ms. Mireau (Canada) welcomed the Special
Rapporteur’s efforts to carry out his mandate in
difficult conditions and his forthcoming visit to Burma,
and asked how countries of the region and the rest of
the international community could assist him.
85. Mr. Thaung Tun (Myanmar), speaking on a
point of order, said he believed that the representative
of Canada had been in the room when he had requested
that his country be called by its official name.
86. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that his
delegation welcomed the report, which detailed the
repression, discrimination, human rights violations and
brutality inflicted by the regime and the effects of
those abuses on flows of refugees and displaced
persons. He welcomed the news that the authorities had
agreed to allow the Special Rapporteur to visit the
country shortly and hoped that he would have an
unfettered opportunity to investigate human rights
violations. The work of the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, was essential to the
reconciliation and democratic transition process. His
delegation would like to know how the Special Envoy,
whose immediate return to Burma it hoped the
authorities would facilitate, and the Special Rapporteur
were coordinating their work and supporting each
other’s mandates.
87. Since the release of all political prisoners was
essential to the democratic transition process, he hoped
that the Special Rapporteur’s visit would give him an
opportunity to investigate their situation and to press
for their unconditional release and for humanitarian
access to them. His delegation was concerned that the
Special Rapporteur had requested the phased release of
prisoners, which might encourage the authorities to
delay. The Special Rapporteur’s thoughts on that
possibility would be appreciated.
88. His Government would continue to work with the
international community to address the threat posed by
the current political situation, not just to the people of
Burma but also to the peace and security of the region.
89. Ms. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil) said that dialogue and
cooperation were the best means of protecting human
rights. She welcomed the Special Rapporteur’s
forthcoming visit to Myanmar and hoped that it would
enable him to carry out his mandate and to improve the
human rights situation there.
90. Mr. Ke Yousheng (China) welcomed the fact that
the Government of Myanmar had decided to invite the
Special Rapporteur to visit the country and hoped that
his mission would meet with full success. His
Government was closely following developments and
the efforts of the international community and the
Government of Myanmar to improve the situation and
noted that things had in fact recently begun to return to
normal. He hoped that the Special Envoy’s return to
Myanmar, the assistance of the international
community and the Special Rapporteur’s visit would
help to set the country on the road to democracy, but in
the end that was for the people and Government of
Myanmar to decide. He wished to point out, however,
that in Chinese “crisis” did not mean “opportunity”.
91. Mr. Gibbons (Ireland), Vice-Chairman, took the
Chair.
92. Mr. Thaung Tun (Myanmar), speaking on a
point of order, said that since 1999 the official name of
his country had been Myanmar. Neighbouring
countries had always known it by that name. It was not
a political appellation but an integrationist one, the
country being composed of more than 100
nationalities. The term “Burma” referred only to the
largest group.
93. Mr. Pinheiro (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar) said that he had
forgotten to mention that one of the paragraphs of the
2 October 2007 resolution of the Human Rights
Council encouraged the Government of Myanmar and
the High Commissioner for Human Rights to engage in
a dialogue. He was sure that the High Commissioner
would cooperate.
94. Replying to the representative of Japan on the
question of the indivisibility of human rights, he saidA/C.3/62/SR.23
07-56053 12
that whenever civil and political rights came up it was
necessary to address economic and social rights at the
same time: the recent crisis in Myanmar constituted a
good example of that fact.
95. Replying to the question by the representative of
Germany concerning news media and information
technologies, he said that he hoped to be able to
convince the Government of Myanmar of the
opportunities offered by the Internet. Transparency was
vital and it was in countries’ own interest that Internet
access should not be banned. On the issue of forced
labour, a constructive dialogue had been engaged
between ILO and the Government, but he could not
specify the number of complaints that had been
successful.
96. Responding to the representative of Australia, he
said that it was the responsibility of the authorities to
guarantee prisoners good conditions of detention and
he reiterated that ICRC visits were the best possible
solution for both prisoners and the Government.
97. Responding to the statement by the representative
of Canada, he said that the best way to facilitate his
work was to continue along current lines and to ensure
an international humanitarian presence on the ground
in order to provide communities with the means to take
charge of their own lives.
98. Replying to the representative of Brazil, he said
that he welcomed the invitation to return to Myanmar.
99. He thanked the representative of China for
showing tolerance with regard to his knowledge of
Chinese.
100. Ms. Abdelhak (Algeria), speaking in exercise of
the right of reply, said that in putting a question to the
High Commissioner for Human Rights at the
Committee’s 22nd meeting, she had not intended to
politicize the issue of human rights in any way. Citing
three reports whose treatment might appear
contradictory, namely, those on Nepal, Uganda and
Western Sahara, she had simply wanted to clarify the
criteria on which the High Commissioner based her
decisions to issue and present reports, in order to save
the Committee from spending time on the same issues
in the future. She therefore regretted that the
representative of Morocco had given a political twist to
what had been a technical question. Her delegation had
no objection to publication of the High
Commissioner’s report on the visits to the occupied
territory of Western Sahara and to the Tindouf camp.
101. Mr. Mohamed (Sudan), speaking in exercise of
the right of reply, noted that the statement made by the
representative of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union at the 22nd meeting, had been redolent of the
colonialism which the Sudan had suffered for far too
long and with the legacy of which the Sudan, like other
countries, had to contend. Referring to Guantánamo
Bay and Abu Ghraib, he said that the representative of
Portugal should have spoken about the human rights of
the migrants who came to Europe from other
continents, and of prisoners held in European countries
that considered themselves to be the liberators of
humankind.
102. His Government’s cooperation with regard to
Darfur was excellent. It was working with the African
Union and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya towards ending
the conflict and hoped that the European Union would
be a partner in that process. Politicization and scorn
did not solve problems, but dialogue could, which was
why preparations were being made for the Special
Rapporteur to visit the Sudan.
103. Mr. Abass (Iraq), speaking in exercise of the
right of reply, said that his Government shared the
concerns expressed by the representative of Portugal
on behalf of the European Union, at the 22nd meeting,
under agenda item 70. The situation of human rights in
Iraq and the situation of Iraqi refugees, as well as the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation owing to
terrorism and militia and criminal activity, were indeed
worrying. His Government had been working hard to
create conditions for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons and was already making
some progress, but it needed contributions from
friendly countries and from international organizations,
which must assist both the refugees and their host
countries, as the Iraqi Government was doing. As the
Secretary-General had indicated in his recent report to
the Security Council (S/2007/608), the cooperation of
the Iraqi Government and the authorities of Iraqi
Kurdistan with United Nations human rights officials
was improving.
104. His Government’s invitation to the Special
Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment demonstrated that it
was determined to improve the human rights situation
in Iraq and to fight against impunity.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.