United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.31
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
13 December 2010
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-60276 (E)
*1060276*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 31st meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 26 October 2010, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Ms. Ploder (Vice-Chair) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Austria)
later: Mr. Tommo Monthe (Chair) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
later: Ms. Ploder (Vice-Chair) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Austria)
Contents
Agenda item 65: Indigenous issues (continued)
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/65/SR.31
10-60276 2
In the absence of Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon),
Ms. Ploder (Austria), Vice-Chair, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 65: Indigenous issues (continued)
(A/C.5/65/L.22)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.22: Indigenous issues
1. Mr. Loayza (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
introduced draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.22 on
indigenous issues on behalf of the original sponsors
and Argentina, Benin, Cuba and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of). The organization of a world indigenous
peoples’ conference in 2014, as proposed in the draft
resolution, would provide the opportunity to consider
implementation mechanisms for the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and to
share experiences and best practices for such
implementation.
2. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Dominican Republic and Honduras had joined
the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/65/336)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/C.3/65/L.25 and L.26)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.26: Torture and other cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment
3. Ms. Kuijpers (Denmark), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.26, informed the Committee that
Australia, Belgium, Canada, the Dominican Republic,
France, Peru, San Marino and Slovakia had joined the
sponsors.
4. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, El Salvador, Honduras, Serbia and
Ukraine had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.25: Committee
against Torture
5. Ms. Kuijpers (Denmark), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.25, informed the Committee that
Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Iceland, Montenegro,
San Marino and Slovakia had joined the sponsors.
6. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala and
Honduras had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (A/65/87, A/65/119, A/65/156,
A/65/162, A/65/171, A/65/207, A/65/222,
A/65/223, A/65/224, A/65/227 and Add.1,
A/65/254, A/65/255, A/65/256, A/65/257,
A/65/258, A/65/259, A/65/260 and Corr.1,
A/65/261, A/65/263, A/65/273, A/65/274,
A/65/280 and Corr.1, A/65/281, A/65/282,
A/65/284, A/65/285, A/65/287, A/65/288,
A/65/310, A/65/321, A/65/322, A/65/340 and
A/65/369; A/C.3/65/L.23)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/65/331, A/65/364, A/65/367, A/65/368,
A/65/370 and A/65/391)
7. Mr. Ruggie (Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the issue of human rights and
transnational corporations and other business
enterprises) said that businesses constituted powerful
forces capable of generating economic growth,
reducing poverty, and increasing demand for the rule of
law, thereby contributing to the realization of a broad
spectrum of human rights.
8. However, there was no single solution to bridging
the gaps between business and human rights. The only
viable path forward was to identify ways in which all
actors — States, businesses, and civil society — could
begin to do many things differently. His proposed
“protect, respect and remedy” conceptual and policy
framework would establish a common foundation for
thinking and action by all stakeholders.
9. For States, the key areas that required
improvement were incoherence and the widespread
legal and policy gaps. The most common problem was
the failure to enforce existing laws and the most
prevalent cause of the gaps was that the Government
departments and agencies that directly shaped business
practices typically worked in isolation from the
Government’s human rights obligations. Moreover,
areas affected by conflict required special
consideration since the worst corporate-related human
rights abuses tended to occur in that context.A/C.3/65/SR.31
3 10-60276
10. In the case of companies, corporate responsibility
to respect human rights required a policy commitment
at the highest levels. Companies should conduct human
rights due diligence to be able to identify and address
any adverse human rights impacts of its activities and
relationships. Access to remedy was essential, yet
obstacles to judicial remedies abounded. For
companies, grievance mechanisms at the site of their
operations could be particularly useful as early warning
mechanisms, and to allow grievances to be addressed
directly before they escalated.
11. He was preparing guiding principles for the
implementation of the framework, which would be sent
to all delegations and posted on the Internet for
comment; he would also submit an options paper for
the Council on how it might follow up on his mandate
when it ended in June 2011.
12. No matter how complex the challenges, actions
should be coherent and cumulative. That was what the
framework and the guiding principles for its
implementation were intended to achieve. Various
elements of his work had already been appropriated by
States and corporations, the latter realigning their risk
management systems to include human rights due
diligence. In addition, the International Standards
Organization and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) had built on
the framework. His mandate had established the solid
foundation needed for continued progress; the follow-
up mandate should sustain the momentum, and close
the most critical enforcement gaps.
13. Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) took the Chair.
14. Ms. Tvedt (Norway) agreed that the closer
enterprises were to the State, the more reason the State
had to ensure they respected human rights. She asked
for further details about the implications for State-
owned enterprises and export credit agencies. In view
of claims that considering human rights might put
companies at a competitive disadvantage, she asked
how international corporations could help level the
playing field. She also asked what Governments could
do to prevent or mitigate corporate-related human
rights abuses in conflict situations.
15. Ms. Chevrier (Canada) asked how Mr. Ruggie
envisaged the follow-up to his mandate, which was due
to end in 2011. She also asked about the areas in which
companies and States should make the greatest effort to
apply the protect, respect and remedy framework.
16. Ms. Gintersdorfer (European Union) said that
the renewed European Union policy on corporate social
responsibility sought to focus more on business and
human rights. A recent study for the European
Commission had illustrated supply chain practices by
European companies, especially in the area of human
rights. She asked whether Mr. Ruggie intended the
guiding principles to cover small and medium-sized
enterprises, whether his reflection on access to
non-judicial remedy took account of the debate on the
revision of the OECD Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises and how his own views had fed into that
debate. Finally, she asked what it was reasonable to
require of public authorities in their procurement
practices in the area of business and human rights, in
particular in relation to due diligence.
17. Ms. Kuijpers (Denmark) agreed that
extraterritorial jurisdiction and the corporate
responsibility to respect human rights in the supply
chain were challenging issues. She asked Mr. Ruggie to
elaborate on the appropriate response by an enterprise
if there were suspicions of human rights abuses in its
supply chain. She also asked for provisional details of
his findings on a possible new body to improve access
to non-judicial remedy and for details of regional
development banks’ mediation and conciliation
options.
18. Ms. Stein (Sweden) said the protect, respect and
remedy framework on business and human rights had
been a source of inspiration for Sweden’s international
conference on corporate social responsibility in 2009
and for its continuing work in that area. She asked how
the international community could best support
continuing work in the field, building on the
achievements of Mr. Ruggie’s mandate.
19. Mr. Matjila (South Africa) asked what solution
Mr. Ruggie would propose to address corporate human
rights abuses in conflict zones, in particular in Africa,
and what recourse victims might have.
20. Mr. Ruggie said that States had greater leverage
over business organizations closely linked to them,
such as export credit agencies, and that the State
played a special role with regard to human rights. The
OECD Export Credit Group was taking steps to ensure
export credit agencies considered the impact of
projects on human rights. In conflict zones, host
Governments might be unable to change the situation,
but home Governments should not make it worse; theyA/C.3/65/SR.31
10-60276 4
had the power, for example, to stop providing
companies with export credit. Governments must also
focus on how far international criminal law applied to
companies as legal persons, an area where increasing
confusion existed.
21. Regarding future measures, he was developing
options to present to the Human Rights Council.
Interpreting the framework and the guiding principles
was important and companies needed to internalize
them. There was also a huge need for capacity-building
involving Governments, business and civil society, as
well as capacity-building at the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR).
22. Most people did not work for large companies
and the approaches and tools appropriate for those
organizations did not apply to small or medium-sized
enterprises. The scale and impact of companies must
therefore be taken into account. It was a question of
changing people’s way of thinking: even a corner
grocer could think about the impact of his or her
business.
23. OECD had referred to the protect, respect, and
remedy framework and planned to add a human rights
chapter based on the United Nations framework to its
own Guidelines. Supply chain issues were complex.
Some companies had as many as 80,000 suppliers and
could not be expected to conduct exhaustive due
diligence processes in each case. Suggestions would be
made that took operating contexts into account: for
example, greater due diligence would be required for
suppliers sourcing from conflict areas.
24. Regarding new institutions for non-judicial
remedy, a pilot study was under way with the World
Legal Forum to explore whether a global network of
local mediators could be established.
25. In response to Sweden’s question about follow-
up, he said that his mandate had become too complex
for a single individual to handle. He had put together a
fairly large team and had worked with 22 law firms and
with volunteers. A portfolio of follow-up measures
would be required.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.23: Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty
26. Ms. Jerin (Croatia), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Armenia, the Congo, the
Dominican Republic, Haiti, Honduras and Panama had
joined the sponsors. Further to the Secretary-General’s
reports to the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly, the Committee had been
encouraged by the decision of many countries to
establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty,
as a first step to reviewing the relevance of capital
punishment building on the momentum of the General
Assembly resolutions adopted in 2007 and 2008. Some
new elements had been introduced and others
mainstreamed to reflect the progress made on that
important and sensitive issue.
27. Mr. Šimonović (Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights), introduced a number of reports,
including the report of the Secretary-General on
promotion and protection of human rights, including
ways and means to promote the human rights of
migrants (A/65/156).
28. The report of the Secretary-General on
globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of
all human rights (A/65/171) provided a concise insight
into the challenges of globalization. It described shared
initiatives undertaken by States, United Nations entities
and international organizations to mitigate the adverse
effects of globalization on human rights, and
recommended ways to address those effects.
29. The report of the Secretary-General on protecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism (A/65/224) emphasized that
measures taken to combat terrorism must comply with
State obligations under international law, in particular
human rights, refugee and humanitarian law. The
General Assembly had recently renewed its
commitment to the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which reaffirmed that the promotion and protection of
human rights for all and the rule of law were essential
to all components of the Strategy. Nevertheless, at
times, national security, including counter-terrorism,
had been used as a pretext to restrict human rights and
to target human rights defenders and others through
vague and ill-defined definitions of terrorism in
national legislation. Other concerns related to a lack of
respect by some States for due process and fair trial
guarantees, as well as the continued use of
administrative detention regimes. Moreover, the
practice of targeted killings by a number of States
challenged international norms set to protect the right
to life and the rule of law. The report highlighted
consideration of such issues by the United NationsA/C.3/65/SR.31
5 10-60276
human rights system and made recommendations for
enhancing the compliance of legislation, policies and
practices for countering terrorism with international
law, including international human rights law.
30. The report of the Secretary-General on the right
to development (A/65/256) gave a detailed account of
the activities undertaken by OHCHR to mainstream the
right to development and identified the lessons learned
and the challenges that remained.
31. The report of the Secretary-General on combating
defamation of religions (A/65/263) contained
information received from States on various elements
described in General Assembly resolution 64/156 and
highlighted a number of initiatives taken by United
Nations entities. Treaty bodies had expressed concern
about serious instances of intolerance, discrimination
and acts of violence based on religion or belief and had
called on States parties to vigorously combat any
advocacy of racial or religious hatred, including
political hate speech, by intensifying public
information and awareness-raising campaigns.
32. The report of the Secretary-General on the draft
programme of activities for the International Year for
People of African Descent (A/65/227 and Add.1)
contained many and varied proposals at the national,
regional and international level with a view to
strengthening national actions and regional and
international cooperation for the benefit of people of
African descent and called for their full enjoyment of
economic, cultural, social, civil and political rights,
their participation and integration in all aspects of
society, and the promotion of a greater knowledge of
and respect for their specific heritage and culture.
33. The report of the Secretary-General on the
moratorium on the use of the death penalty (A/65/280
and Corr.l) confirmed the global trend towards
abolition of the death penalty.
34. The report of the Secretary-General on missing
persons (A/65/285) was based on contributions
received from Member States, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the International
Commission on Missing Persons and the Argentine
Forensic Anthropology Team. It highlighted the need to
adopt measures to prevent persons from going missing;
to establish the right of families to know; to develop
forensic science capacity, and to counter impunity. It
also underlined the importance of strengthening
international cooperation to locate, identify and
repatriate persons missing as a result of violent
conflicts and human rights violations, and the need to
train local forensic experts.
35. The report on the final evaluation of the
implementation of the first phase of the World
Programme for Human Rights Education (A/65/322)
had been submitted by OHCHR on behalf of the United
Nations Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee on
Human Rights in the School System.
36. The report of the Secretary-General on the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran (A/65/370) surveyed recent developments in Iran’s
engagement with the international human rights system
and outlined various developments with regard to
issues such as the death penalty, notably for juvenile
offenders, torture, women’s rights, rights of minorities
and due process. He noted the successful completion of
Iran’s Universal Periodic Review and, while,
welcoming the Government’s invitation to the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to visit Iran, renewed
his call to receive the Human Rights Council special
procedures in conformity with the standing invitation
issued by Iran in 2002.
37. The report of the Secretary-General on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (A/65/391) provided an overview of
continued human rights concerns and the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the country. It underlined the
continued suffering of the people from chronic food
insecurity, a declining health system, lack of access to
safe drinking water, and the deteriorating quality of
education, which was seriously hampering the
fulfilment of basic human rights. Besides focusing on
economic and social rights, the report also looked at
the situation of civil and political rights, which was
equally dramatic.
38. Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran) said
that General Assembly resolution 64/170 had been
adopted as a result of the political ambitions of certain
countries and was an unjustified and unfortunate
manipulation of the United Nations human rights
system. His Government had provided information to
OHCHR in the hope that the report would be impartial,
balanced, accurate, substantiated, well documented and
free from prejudice and bias. However, the report
(A/65/370) did not appear to be an accurate reflection
of the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of
Iran; based on outdated allegations, it was notA/C.3/65/SR.31
10-60276 6
comprehensive and ignored achievements made in the
field of human rights.
39. The religious convictions, constitution and
obligations under international treaties of the Islamic
Republic of Iran meant that his Government was
committed to promoting human rights nationally and
internationally, and would continue its efforts, despite
the negative report of the Secretary-General.
40. Mr. Melia (United States of America) welcomed
the Secretary-General’s comprehensive, non-partial,
well-documented, objective and timely report on the
human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
He also welcomed the Secretary-General’s request that
the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
facilitate visits by the special procedure mandate
holders to the country to conduct more comprehensive
assessments.
41. Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran),
speaking on a point of order, said that the report of the
Secretary-General had been procedurally but not
substantively introduced by the Assistant Secretary-
General. Since the report was compiled by OHCHR
and no authority was present to take questions from
delegates and answer them substantively, the report
could not be opened for discussion.
42. Mr. Melia (United States of America) wondered
how the Iranian Government could justify the denial of
access to a university education for followers of the
Baha’i faith. He also asked the Assistant Secretary-
General what more could be done to press the Islamic
Republic of Iran on the need for fair and transparent
judicial procedures, particularly in light of the
worrying trend of accusing political prisoners of
mohareb (enmity against God), which was punishable
by death.
43. With regard to the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, his Government was pleased that the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs had been
permitted to visit that country and to hold discussions
with the Government on humanitarian and human
rights concerns. However, his Government remained
deeply concerned about the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and
continued to urge the authorities to recognize the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and allow him to visit the country. The
international community did not have accurate data on
the humanitarian conditions in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and he asked whether the Secretary-
General’s office had any recommendations for ensuring
the accurate collection of data on food, health and
education. Finally, he asked what more could be done
so that the international community could better
understand the stance of the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the
recommendations made following the universal
periodic review carried out in December 2009, and
whether the authorities intended to follow up on any of
them.
44. Ms. Gintersdorfer (European Union), referring
to the Secretary-General’s report on the situation of
human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, asked the
Assistant Secretary-General for his opinion on the
intrusive measures taken by the Iranian authorities to
restrict use of the Internet and other information and
communications technology, in the context of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, to which the Islamic Republic of Iran
was party.
45. Although the Islamic Republic of Iran had
accepted many of the recommendations made during
the universal periodic review, the authorities had
rejected those pertaining to the visits of special
procedures mandate holders and those which did not
concern internationally recognized human rights. Her
delegation was concerned that Special Rapporteurs
were still unable to carry out country visits to the
Islamic Republic of Iran and asked the Assistant
Secretary-General for his opinion on the dangerous
relativism of “recognized” and “unrecognized” rights,
when they were inherent to human dignity.
46. With regard to the Secretary-General’s report on
the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the European Union
remained gravely concerned by the situation. The
European Union and other sponsors would again
introduce a draft resolution on the matter and urged the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to address the multiple human rights challenges
facing the country and improve cooperation with
United Nations agencies and mechanisms. She asked
the Assistant Secretary-General to indicate how the
United Nations intended to engage with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to facilitate follow-upA/C.3/65/SR.31
7 10-60276
action on the recommendations of the universal
periodic review.
47. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that his Government did not recognize
the reports of the Special Rapporteur or the Secretary-
General on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which had
been submitted pursuant to the resolution introduced
by the European Union and Japan as part of a political
plot by hostile forces to isolate and stifle his country’s
system of government. The European Union had
chosen to adopt a confrontational approach instead of
pursuing dialogue and cooperation, which had been
making good progress. The Charter of the United
Nations provided that every country had the right to
self-determination, and all Member States, especially
the strong ones, should respect that right. If the
European Union and the United States of America
wanted to genuinely promote and protect human rights
in individual countries, they should pursue dialogue
and cooperation.
48. Mr. Šimonović (Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights) said that the report on the situation of
human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran included
positive comments, but also some negative ones. The
engagement of the Iranian Government with the
universal periodic review and the presence of a high-
level delegation was to be commended, as was their
ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities and cooperation with Human Rights
Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, to which Iran had submitted the
first periodic reports in over a decade. However,
despite a standing invitation having been issued by the
Iranian authorities in 2002, no special procedures
mandate holders had been allowed to visit the country
since 2005. A total of 42 communications had been
sent by OHCHR but only two replies had been
received.
49. With regard to the interference with broadcasts
and online coverage of events in the country, that did
indeed constitute a serious breach of the right to
freedom of opinion and expression as outlined in the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to
which the Islamic Republic of Iran was party.
Similarly, the right to education of the Baha’i, which
had been addressed by different special procedures
mandate holders, was also covered by instruments to
which Iran was party. He encouraged the Islamic
Republic of Iran to allow the Special Rapporteurs on
the right to education and on the freedom of religion to
visit the country and assess the situation.
50. Further to the issues raised by the representative
of the United States of America, the resolution on the
moratorium on the use of the death penalty called for
capital punishment to be imposed only for the most
serious crimes, but crimes against religion did not
qualify for such punishment.
51. The Iranian authorities were engaged in ongoing
dialogue with OHCHR and he sincerely hoped that
dialogue would continue and that OHCHR
representatives would be allowed to visit the country
soon. A notable example of that dialogue was the
decision to hold a joint seminar on judiciary standards
in the near future.
52. With regard to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, the essential problem was the lack of
communication with OHCHR, as the authorities
refused to engage in dialogue with OHCHR or even
accept technical cooperation. The results of the
universal periodic review represented a new
opportunity for the Government to seek OHCHR
support and expertise to implement the 117 comments
and recommendations. OHCHR had been informed
orally that the Government took note of the comments
and rejected about half of them, but no written reply
had been submitted. Moreover, efforts for cooperation
and dialogue were seriously limited by the failure of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
recognize the relevant General Assembly and Human
Rights Council resolutions.
53. He welcomed the work of the Government with
the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World
Food Programme and hoped that the report on their
recent mission to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea would be issued soon. The Government’s
cooperation with the World Health Organization to
monitor health activities was another welcome step in
the right direction. He encouraged the authorities to
allow the Special Rapporteurs on health and the right
to food to visit the country to follow up on those
positive steps.
54. Mr. Lambert (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
Iceland and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; and the stabilization and association
process country Albania, said that no country in theA/C.3/65/SR.31
10-60276 8
world could pride itself on an impeccable human rights
record, despite the commitments assumed under
international law. The situation of all human rights
could be improved by frank discussions on best
practice and lessons learned, combined with
cooperation and technical assistance; but the States still
had to take the first step.
55. For example, Mongolia, Guatemala and Djibouti
had either suspended or abolished the death penalty,
and the Republic of Moldova had made notable
progress in the area of human rights. Several countries
had issued a permanent invitation to the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council; Colombia
had announced agrarian reform measures; the States of
Southeast Asia had adopted a new regional mechanism
for the promotion of human rights, and several other
countries, including Gabon, Georgia, Iran and Malawi,
had ratified various human rights instruments.
56. Nevertheless some serious situations required the
international community’s special attention and the
General Assembly had a responsibility to work towards
universal respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all human beings, without distinction,
complementing the actions of the Human Rights
Council. Consequently, the European Union was
calling attention to the human rights situation in
Myanmar and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea by presenting resolutions on the situation in
those countries.
57. In the case of Myanmar, local authorities had
presented the upcoming elections as a decisive step
towards democratization and national reconciliation.
However, that would require the participation of ethnic
groups and the opposition, and factors such as the
electoral laws and party registration procedures
thwarted opposition activities. In that regard, the
European Union called for the immediate release of all
political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi. In
2009, the General Assembly had urged the authorities
to investigate all alleged human rights violations and
prosecute those responsible in order to put an end to
impunity. In view of the lack of response, the European
Union reiterated that appeal and called on the
Government to cooperate fully with the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council.
58. In the case of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, the problem was the lack of respect for
almost all human rights. The European Union was
concerned particularly by public executions,
abbreviated proceedings, forced labour camps, torture,
absence of freedom of expression and the State’s
oppressive control over the population, as well as the
major humanitarian crisis that the country faced.
Nevertheless, it noted that some measures had been
taken to alleviate the latter by improving cooperation
with United Nations agencies, and the European Union
invited the Government to improve the human rights
situation by opening up the country and allocating
resources for essential services such as education,
health and food aid.
59. The European Union also reiterated its concern
with regard to the human rights situation in Iran, where
political opposition had been suppressed since the 2009
elections. Freedom of expression and association were
flouted; the courts acted as an instrument of the
Government, and religious freedom had been curtailed.
The European Union urged the Iranian authorities to
suspend all sentences to lapidation and, in accordance
with international standards, to reserve the death
penalty for the most heinous crimes. It also condemned
all human rights violations based on sex, sexual
orientation or gender identity.
60. The European Union had repeatedly expressed its
concern with regard to human rights violations in
Syria, in particular, as a result of recent declarations by
the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy and observations made during the
fifteenth session of the Human Rights Council.
61. Attention was called to the execution of those
condemned to death in Iraq, and the violence against
human rights defenders, including journalists. There
had been reports of the use of arbitrary detention and
torture in the country’s prisons. The European Union
called on the Government to institute the rule of law, to
protect religious minorities and to improve the
situation of women.
62. The violence in Sudan, especially inter-tribal
conflicts in the southern border area, severely affected
the civilian population. The country faced major
challenges in the coming months, including the
referendum on self-determination for southern Sudan
and the subsequent transition period, and it was
essential that the referendum process be implemented
in full respect for freedom of expression and
association. Therefore, the European Union was
concerned about the numerous obstacles to theA/C.3/65/SR.31
9 10-60276
activities of civil society, and to freedom of the press in
both northern and southern Sudan. Many of the
recommendations made by the Independent Expert on
the situation of human rights in Sudan had yet to be
implemented. The situation in Darfur had deteriorated
again and impediments to the access of humanitarian
aid workers to the areas affected by the conflict should
be removed. The effort to eliminate impunity was an
evident priority and the European Union recalled that
all parties were legally bound to collaborate with the
International Criminal Court under Security Council
resolution 1593 (2005).
63. Regarding Somalia, the European Union was very
concerned by the total impunity for grave human rights
violations; the increase of violence, and the reports of
massive human rights violations perpetrated by
extremist groups, including the forced recruitment of
child soldiers. It called for increasing measures to
combat such violations and, in that regard, welcomed
the recent interactive dialogue with the Human Rights
Council.
64. The European Union had been horrified to learn
of recent cases of collective rape committed by rebel
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such
cruelty should not go unpunished and required action
by the Congolese authorities and the international
community. Combating impunity, improving the
situation of women and protecting human rights
defenders should be national priorities. The report on
most serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law between 1993 and 2003
in the Democratic Republic of Congo of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights made a
significant contribution to combating impunity for
human rights violations and required appropriate
follow-up. The observations on the report made by
several African countries should be assessed.
65. The harassment of political activists and civil
society in Zimbabwe gave cause for concern. The
Government of national unity had made some progress,
but much remained to be done in order to return the
country to democracy.
66. National reconciliation in Sri Lanka should
ensure that human rights violations did not go
unpunished. The European Union had supported the
appointment of a panel of experts to advise the
Secretary-General on the matter and encouraged the Sri
Lankan authorities to increase their efforts to improve
the country’s human rights situation. Recent events
suggested that the democratic principles established in
the Constitution were being undermined. Sri Lanka
should allow access to all those detained arbitrarily and
ensure their right to a fair trial.
67. The European Union called on Belarus to
guarantee that the upcoming elections would respect
democratic standards and human rights, because there
had been reports of restrictions of freedom of
expression and association. Moreover, the death
penalty remained in force in the country; a moratorium
should be established, with a view to its abolishment,
in line with all the other countries of Europe.
68. The European Union welcomed the recent
initiative of China to reduce the number of crimes
carrying the death penalty.
69. Ms. Zhang Dan (China), speaking on a point of
order, asked the Chair whether the representative of
Belgium had exceeded the 15-minute time limit for
speakers delivering statements on behalf of a group.
70. The Chair said that the time limit was
established by the Chair and asked the representative
of the European Union to conclude his statement.
71. Mr. Lambert (Belgium) said that the European
Union was concerned about the deterioration of human
rights in China, in areas such as the rule of law,
freedom of expression and restrictions placed on
human rights defenders. It called on China to release
the winner of the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize, Liu Xiaobo,
and other prisoners of conscience. The European Union
remained concerned about the restrictions placed on
Chinese citizens belonging to ethnic or religious
minorities and the recent sentencing of several of their
representatives to extended prison terms. Lastly, it
encouraged China to ratify the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, which it had signed in
1998.
72. In Eritrea, 11 members of the National Assembly
and 10 independent journalists had been unlawfully
detained since 2001 and had not yet been charged,
contrary to the country’s human rights obligations. The
European Union had received unconfirmed reports that
some of them had died in prison. It asked the Eritrean
authorities to provide information on where political
prisoners were detained and to allow them to
communicate with their families and their lawyers.
Furthermore, it demanded the unconditional release ofA/C.3/65/SR.31
10-60276 10
those prisoners and anyone else detained for the
peaceful expression of their opinions.
73. Lastly, the situation of human rights defenders in
Ethiopia was also a cause for concern, especially since
the adoption, in 2009, of the Charities and Societies
Proclamation, which had had a negative impact on civil
society. The international community should continue
to monitor respect for human rights norms worldwide.
The European Union was ready to work with any
country that wished to achieve the goals established by
the United Nations for the protection and promotion of
human rights.
74. Mr. MacDonald (Suriname), speaking on behalf
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), said that
although the Committee had addressed the situation of
several human rights, many challenges remained in
tackling other human rights such as the right to be free
of discrimination, poverty, impunity and violence. It
had been recognized that the third pillar of the United
Nations, namely respect for and promotion and
protection of human rights, was an integral element of
efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
The CARICOM countries urged Member States to
redouble their efforts to strengthen the global
partnership for development.
75. The Caribbean Week of Agriculture had been held
recently, highlighting the importance of energizing the
region’s agriculture sector to contribute to eradicating
hunger, guaranteeing food security and achieving
economic development. Also, the Council for Human
and Social Development had recently assessed
advances in the region. Notable progress had been
made in the areas of education and the free movement
of skills, gender parity, youth development and health
services including the fight against HIV/AIDS and
non-communicable diseases.
76. Nevertheless, the interconnectedness of national
economies in a globalized world and the susceptibility
to external shocks severely impacted the lives and
livelihoods of people, especially in the small Caribbean
countries. Decreasing levels of revenue, restricted
access to credit and the servicing of high levels of
external debt, together with climate change, threatened
to halt and, in some cases, reverse their economic
growth.
77. The Caribbean Community remained committed
to furthering socio-economic development and was
convinced that it could share useful experiences and
make a meaningful contribution to the work of the
various treaty bodies in particular, and the international
system of human rights in general. It expected two
CARICOM candidates to be elected to one of the treaty
bodies shortly, which would not only increase its
representation but also contribute to putting into
practice the principle of equitable geographical
distribution.
78. The CARICOM States had noted with great
concern the additional resources required for treaty
bodies to effectively carry out their mandate and the
associated constraints, such as the availability of
support staff and adequate funding. They welcomed
efforts to further streamline and harmonize the work of
treaty bodies and advocated a simplified reporting
procedure to alleviate the burden not only on States
Parties but also on the treaty bodies themselves. They
supported the suggestion that the recommendations for
follow-up by different treaty bodies be consolidated,
with a view to targeted technical assistance, when
requested. In that regard, they appreciated the technical
and financial assistance provided by their partners for
the preparation of national reports.
79. The initiative to convene the meeting of the
chairs of the United Nations human rights treaty bodies
every other year at the regional level merited support,
as it would increase awareness of the work of the treaty
bodies and provide an opportunity for the treaty bodies
to familiarize themselves with regional peculiarities.
80. The CARICOM States supported the work of the
Council to address crisis situations through the
convening of emergency meetings and called on
members of the international community to continue
keeping the commitments they had made to Haiti in
order to ensure that all Haitians could enjoy their
universally recognized human rights.
81. There was particular concern about special
mandate holders exceeding their mandates. While they
should maintain their independence, mandate holders
should always fully respect the Code of Conduct for
Special Procedures Mandate Holders of the Human
Rights Council; otherwise, they would not contribute
to the necessary environment for a constructive
dialogue with States to promote and protect human
rights.
82. Human rights education was essential for the full
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms
and to foster tolerance and respect for the dignity of
others. However, it should respect diverse national
contexts and take into account the evolving capacities
of students receiving the education. Lastly, it was
anticipated that the necessary technical and financialA/C.3/65/SR.31
11 10-60276
resources would soon be available to implement the
initiative launched by the region, together with the
African Group, to erect a memorial to the victims of
slavery and the trans-Atlantic slave trade at the United
Nations headquarters.
Statements made in exercise of the right of reply
83. Ms. Zhang Dan (China) said that her delegation
firmly objected to the unreasonable accusation made
by the European Union. The allegation was
incompatible with China’s record of attaching great
attention to the promotion and protection of human
rights and its many legislative measures taken to that
end over the previous three decades. Significant
progress had been made towards improving the
situation with regard to freedom of expression and
religion, and democracy and the rule of law had been
steadily strengthened. No one would be punished for
defending his or her lawful rights by legitimate means.
Furthermore, her Government strongly supported the
development of areas inhabited by ethnic minorities
and respected and protected their languages, religions
and cultural traditions, in addition to promoting their
economic development.
84. Liu Xiaobo was a criminal who had been
convicted by the Chinese judicial system and whose
acts ran counter to the purposes of the Nobel Peace
Prize. The awarding of that prize to an individual
whose deeds had nothing to do with the promotion and
protection of human rights further highlighted the
politicization of the Prize and showed no respect for
the Chinese judicial system.
85. The Belgian representative’s call, on behalf of the
European Union, for the release of a criminal
represented a gross attempt to infringe on China’s
judicial sovereignty and had laid bare the double
standards adopted by European Union member States,
which turned a blind eye to the advances in China’s
human rights situation while also ignoring their own
serious human rights-related issues, including, inter
alia, violations of the rights of immigrants and Roma
and racial discrimination. Such a politicized attitude
ran counter to the principles of objectivity and fairness
and would severely compromise the possibility of
cooperating on human rights issues. China therefore
appealed to the European Union to address its own
problems in the field of human rights and to adopt a
constructive attitude that promoted dialogue.
86. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that the European Union had
consistently adopted an interventionist approach of
arrogance and intimidation of certain countries in
dealing with human rights issues. The action of the
European Union, exemplified by its representative’s
stereotypical allegations, was part of a premeditated
political plan to tarnish the image of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in the view of the
international community and to use international
pressure and sanctions to bring about a change of
regime. He hoped that the European Union would
instead act on its alleged concern for human rights by
first tackling the gross violations of human rights
committed in its member States. Such abuses included
racism, xenophobia, violence and police brutality.
Furthermore, the European Union neglected to mention
the names of its friends, countries that had committed
and continued to commit human rights violations in
Iraq and Afghanistan, exposing its policy of criticizing
the weak and remaining silent about the appalling
crimes committed by the strong.
87. Rather than ask his country for dialogue and
cooperation while attacking it with confrontational
resolutions, the European Union, which was clearly
concerned not with human rights but with promoting
its own interests, should adopt a policy for equitable
treatment of the human rights situations in all
countries, regardless of their national system and of its
own bilateral relations and national interests.
88. Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran),
responding to the unfounded and unsubstantiated
allegations made by the delegation of Belgium on
behalf of the European Union, said that the European
Union disregarded the violation of human rights in its
own part of the world while continuing to blame and
condemn others for alleged violations. The reports of
treaty bodies and other stakeholders revealed cases of
human rights violations and discriminatory treatment
of migrants, Muslims, Arabs and persons of African
descent in a number of European Union member
States. In Belgium, for instance, the administrative
courts had repeatedly condemned the federal agency
responsible for receiving asylum-seekers for ill-
treatment of those persons, many of whom were
sleeping in the street. In addition, an asylum-seeker
from Cameroon had committed suicide earlier that year
after being beaten by police officers during the
authorities’ failed attempt to expel him from the
country.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.