United Nations A/C.3/63/SR.38
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-third session
Official Records
Distr.: General
23 December 2008
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
08-59018 (E)
*0859018*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 38th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 6 November 2008, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Majoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)
Contents
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 56: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)A/C.3/63/SR.38
08-59018 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.20, L.24, L.25,
L.27-L.29, L.36 and L.40-L.45)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.20: The role of the
Ombudsman, mediator and other national human
rights institutions in the promotion and protection of
human rights
1. The Chairman said that he had been informed
that the draft resolution contained no programme
budget implications.
2. Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco), speaking on behalf
of the sponsors, said that the following delegations had
joined the sponsors: Angola, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, the Gambia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mongolia, the Netherlands,
Oman, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi
Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden,
the United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
3. The draft resolution underscored the importance
of national human rights institutions, in particular
Ombudsmen and mediators, in promoting and
protecting human rights. The text was the result of
frank and open discussions during informal
consultations. In that context he expressed concern at
the increasingly acrimonious atmosphere of debate
within the Third Committee and stressed the
importance of a frank but respectful exchange of
views. Despite differences of opinion, the international
community must be united in its efforts to promote
human rights. He urged the Committee to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote.
4. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following delegations had also
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution: Azerbaijan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
Iraq, Jamaica, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Norway,
Panama, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, and Ukraine.
5. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.20 was adopted.
6. Ms. Gasri (France), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, recalled that the Paris Principles
relating to the status of national institutions, adopted in
annex to General Assembly resolution 48/134, played a
key role in the establishment and strengthening of such
mechanisms as ombudsmen and mediators as well as
other national human rights institutions. She
underscored the important contribution that civil
society and non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
made to the work of national human rights institutions
and said that the draft resolution should be considered
in the context of the more general draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.23 on national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.24: International Year of
Human Rights Learning
7. The Chairman said that he had been informed
that the draft resolution contained no programme
budget implications.
8. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin), speaking on behalf of
the sponsors, said that a number of revisions had been
made to the text. In the first line of the second
preambular paragraph, the words “and reiterating” had
been replaced by the phrase “which decided”. In the
first line of the ninth preambular paragraph the words
“where appropriate,” had been inserted following the
phrase “the private sector and”. At the end of
paragraph 2, the words “without losing sight, where
appropriate, of the work” had been replaced with the
phrase “bearing in mind the complementary efforts
undertaken within the framework”. Lastly, in the fifth
line of paragraph 2 and the sixth line of paragraph 3
the word “plans” had been replaced by “programmes”.
9. He expressed concern at the lack of awareness of
human rights across the world. The draft resolution
sought to address that problem by stressing the
importance of human rights learning, as opposed to
merely education. Education tended to be the teaching
of what and how to think whereas learning was a more
independent and experience-based process in which
individuals shaped their own ideas. That would makeA/C.3/63/SR.38
3 08-59018
human rights more relevant, promote greater
acceptance of human rights standards and ensure the
fullest possible enjoyment of human rights.
10. The following delegations had joined the
sponsors: Antigua and Barbuda, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Indonesia, Jordan, Lebanon, Oman, Portugal,
Switzerland and the United States of America. He
urged the Committee to adopt the draft resolution by
consensus with a view to promoting a culture of human
rights and dignity and contributing to increased
freedom in the world and the realization of the
Millennium Development Goals.
11. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following delegations wished to
join the sponsors: Algeria, Armenia, Belize, Cyprus,
Ecuador, Greece, Grenada, Haiti, Honduras, Israel,
Lithuania, Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Spain, Suriname, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the
United Arab Emirates.
12. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.24, as orally revised,
was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.25: Effective promotion of
the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to
National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities
13. Ms. Schofer (Austria) introduced draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.25 on behalf of the sponsors, which had
been joined by Albania, Australia, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ecuador, El Salvador, Georgia, Latvia,
Malta, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, the Russian
Federation, Serbia, Sweden and Timor-Leste. Meeting
the aspirations of persons belonging to minorities and
promoting their full participation in societies
contributed to political and social stability and peace
and enriched the cultural diversity and heritage of
society. That could be achieved only through the
promotion of tolerance, mutual understanding and the
recognition of pluralism. Her delegation therefore
hoped that the draft resolution would be adopted by
consensus.
14. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Italy and San Marino had also joined
the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.27: Human rights and
extreme poverty
15. Mr. Pérez (Peru) introduced draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.27 on behalf of the sponsors, which had
been joined by Angola, Australia, Madagascar,
Mongolia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. The eradication of poverty was one of the
greatest challenges facing the international community
as a whole and developing countries in particular.
Greater international cooperation and improved
national strategies were required to meet international
poverty reduction commitments, including the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The draft
resolution drew attention to the need to respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms in all poverty
reduction strategies. It was hoped that, as in the past,
the draft resolution would be adopted by consensus.
16. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the sponsors had also been joined by
Albania, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guyana,
Haiti, Indonesia, Israel, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Norway, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, the Sudan, Swaziland,
Timor-Leste, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates and
the United Republic of Tanzania.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.28: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
17. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) introduced draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.28 on behalf of the sponsors, which had
been joined by Afghanistan, Botswana, the Congo,
Kuwait, Lesotho, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar,
Sierra Leone, Suriname, Tunisia, Uzbekistan, and
Zambia. The draft resolution addressed the
multifaceted effects of globalization on production,
technology and means of communication in the context
of the food, fuel and economic crises. It explored the
effects of globalization on the enjoyment of human
rights and underscored the right to development of all
countries as well as the need to step up international
cooperation to narrow the gap between North and
South. His delegation hoped that increased
international cooperation would combat the negative
effects of globalization, and it also hoped that the draft
resolution would be adopted by consensus.A/C.3/63/SR.38
08-59018 4
18. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that El Salvador, Honduras, Mozambique,
Namibia and Sri Lanka had also joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.29: Subregional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
19. Mr. Makanga (Gabon) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.29 on behalf of the sponsors,
which had been joined by Algeria, Burkina Faso,
Cape Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Ghana, Guinea,
Kenya, Madagascar, Mali, Morocco, Rwanda, Senegal,
Swaziland, and Zambia. Since its establishment in
2002, the Subregional Centre had made a significant
contribution to promoting and protecting human rights
in Central Africa. It encouraged the establishment of
national institutions for the protection of human rights
and promoted democracy, the rule of law, conflict
prevention as well as peace and sustainable
development. General Assembly resolution 62/221 had
provided the Centre with additional funds to enable it
to respond to growing needs in carrying out its
mandate. His delegation hoped the draft resolution
would be adopted by consensus.
20. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the sponsors had also been joined by
Albania, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Djibouti,
El Salvador, France, Honduras, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Portugal, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and
Uganda.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.36: Missing persons
21. Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.36 on behalf of the sponsors,
which had been joined by Austria, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Jordan, Peru, Nigeria, Saudi
Arabia, Switzerland, and Ukraine. The draft resolution
reaffirmed the right of families to know the fate of
their relatives reported missing in connection with
armed conflicts. It showed that the issue of missing
persons had a negative impact on efforts to put an end
to conflicts and it stressed the need to address the issue
as part of peacebuilding processes on the basis of
transparency, accountability and public participation.
Given the importance of the issue, his delegation
would appreciate the support of Member States for the
draft resolution.
22. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the sponsors had also been joined by
Albania, Angola, Canada, Egypt, Honduras, Italy,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Qatar, Tajikistan, and Uganda.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.40: Situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
23. Mr. Normandin (Canada), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that a year
had passed since the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 62/168, which expressed very serious
concern at the situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran. In October 2008, the Secretary-
General had issued a report pursuant to that resolution
(A/63/459), which noted positive developments, but
provided evidence of a wide range of human rights
violations. Section IV of the report indicated that
cooperation with international human rights
mechanisms had been inadequate.
24. The draft resolution was based on the findings of
the Secretary-General’s report. The Third Committee
had universal membership and, therefore, had a
particular responsibility to call attention to such
abuses. In order to maintain the credibility of the
General Assembly, it was essential that Member States
should vote in favour of the draft resolution. By
establishing the Human Rights Council, the General
Assembly had not intended to reduce the Committee’s
remit. The Council’s universal periodic review system
was valuable, but took place only every four years and
was at any rate intended to complement other human
rights mechanisms rather than to replace them.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.41: International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
25. Ms. Melon (Argentina), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance had been
adopted on 20 December 2006. Under the Convention,
States parties had a duty to take action against enforced
disappearance. The draft resolution supported the
Convention by calling upon States that had not yet
done so to consider signing and ratifying it as a matter
of priority and also requested the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly a report on the status
of the Convention and the implementation of the
resolution. The following States had joined theA/C.3/63/SR.38
5 08-59018
sponsors: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cambodia, Canada,
Côte d’Ivoire, Georgia, Malawi, Malta, Norway,
Poland, the Republic of Moldova, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Swaziland, Sweden and the United Republic of
Tanzania.
26. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Cyprus, Liechtenstein, the Republic of Korea,
Senegal and Serbia had also joined in sponsoring the
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.42: The right to food
27. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that, because
of the food and financial crisis, a far greater number of
people suffered from hunger than had previously been
the case. However, the problem was not solely a result
of that crisis; the aim of the resolution was to take a
broader approach to the issue. She welcomed the rapid
response of the Human Rights Council. The following
States had joined the sponsors of the resolution:
Armenia, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Costa
Rica, El Salvador, Malawi, Nigeria, Peru, the Russian
Federation, Timor-Leste and Turkey.
28. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following States had also become sponsors:
Algeria, Belize, Bhutan, Botswana, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Croatia, Djibouti, Gabon, Guyana,
Hungary, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Suriname,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.43: Respect for the right to
universal freedom of travel and the vital importance of
family reunification
29. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that her
country, like other Latin American and Caribbean
States, was concerned at legislation curtailing the
reunification of families and the sending of
remittances. A resolution on that item was submitted
biennially. Because the problem had remained the
same, the current draft resolution contained only
minimal changes. She called on Latin American and
Caribbean States in particular to join the sponsors.
Lastly, she said that Belarus, El Salvador, Honduras
and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had become sponsors.
30. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Angola, the Philippines and Zimbabwe had also
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.44: Promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order
31. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, which had been
joined by Honduras, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the
Russian Federation and Viet Nam. All persons had a
right to a democratic and equitable international order,
which would lead to the fulfilment of their human
rights. The current food and financial crisis endangered
the enjoyment of human rights and drew attention to
fundamental issues such as sovereignty over wealth
and natural resources and the right to development.
32. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, El Salvador, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Lebanon, Sierra Leone and
South Africa had also joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.45: Equitable geographical
distribution in the membership of the human rights
treaty bodies
33. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that its
purpose was to ensure that all human rights treaty
bodies truly represented the diversity of historical,
cultural, religious, political and juridical heritages
across the world. She said that Fiji, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Lesotho, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Namibia and the Russian Federation had joined the
sponsors of the draft resolution and she urged all
Member States to support it.
34. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Algeria, Angola, Belize, El Salvador,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, the Russian
Federation and Saudi Arabia had also joined the
sponsors of the draft resolution.
35. Mr. Rezvani (Islamic Republic of Iran), speaking
in exercise of the right of reply with regard to the
statement by the representative of Canada introducing
draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.40, expressed regret at theA/C.3/63/SR.38
08-59018 6
introduction yet again of a draft resolution on the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran. That was an example of the confrontational
attitude toward his Government adopted by the
delegation of Canada, which was trying to make an old
legal dispute between the two countries a multilateral
issue.
36. The draft resolution was clearly a politically
motivated attempt to exert pressure on the Iranian
Government and lacked objectivity, credibility and
relevance, presenting an excessively negative and
outdated picture. It took note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in
the Islamic Republic of Iran (A/63/459), about which
his delegation had already expressed its reservations.
37. From a procedural point of view, the role of the
Third Committee was primarily to discuss policy and
make strategic policy recommendations to the General
Assembly which would serve to guide the international
community, in particular the Human Rights Council, in
its task of promoting human rights. Consideration of
the situation of human rights in specific countries fell
within the purview of the Human Rights Council, in
particular its Universal Periodic Review mechanism,
which provided an appropriate forum for impartial and
careful review.
38. The introduction of country-specific draft
resolutions in the Third Committee was an abuse of the
Committee, undermined the authority of the Human
Rights Council and duplicated and interfered with the
work of the Universal Periodic Review. Such draft
resolutions were counter-productive and divisive.
Accordingly, when the Committee was asked to take
action on the draft resolution, his delegation would
move the adjournment of the debate in accordance with
rule 116 of the rules of procedure. He recalled that in
2006 and 2007 the Committee had decided to take no
action with regard to the draft resolution. He was
confident that it would do so once again at the current
session.
39. Mr. Normandin (Canada), speaking in exercise
of the right of reply to the statement by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, pointed
out that draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.40 had forty-two
sponsors.
Agenda item 56: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/63/L.12/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.12/Rev.1: Intensification of
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women
40. Mr. Nihon (Belgium), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of Belgium and the Netherlands,
said that some revisions had been introduced into the
text. In footnote 8 to paragraph 4, a reference to
document A/63/214/Corr.1* had been added. In
paragraph 12, the word “conflict,” which appeared in
the first, third and fifth lines, had been changed to
“conflicts”; and in the third line, the comma after
“conflicts” had been replaced by the word “and”. In the
ninth line of paragraph 12, the phrase “where violence
is committed against women and girls,” had been
replaced by “where violence against women and girls
is committed against them,”. Finally, paragraph 18 had
been reworded to read: “Stresses the contribution of the
ad hoc international criminal tribunals in ending
impunity through ensuring accountability and
punishing perpetrators of violence against women, as
well as the contribution that the International Criminal
Court can make, and urges States to consider ratifying
or acceding as a matter of priority to the Rome Statute,
which entered into force on 1 July 2002;”.
41. The following countries had joined the sponsors
of the draft resolution, as orally revised: Albania,
Australia, Belize, Botswana, Cameroon, Hungary,
Iceland, Malta, Mexico and Uruguay. The draft
resolution focused on combating impunity and the
culture of tolerance in regard to violence against
women. It recognized efforts made, but called upon
Member States to continue developing more global and
systematic national strategies to eliminate violence
against women that made use of best practices in
legislation, prevention, enforcement, assistance to
victims and rehabilitation.
42. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had also joined the
sponsors of the draft resolution, as orally revised:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire,
Eritrea, Grenada, Guyana, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi,
Mauritius, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Norway, Philippines, Poland, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa,A/C.3/63/SR.38
7 08-59018
Swaziland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Ukraine and
Zambia.
43. Mr. González (Costa Rica) said that the changes
to paragraph 18 did not reflect his country’s point of
view on the role of the International Criminal Court,
which was a vital instrument in fighting impunity.
44. Mr. Frommelt (Liechtenstein) said that, while
his country had supported the draft resolution, it could
not become a sponsor owing to the changes in
paragraph 18. The contributions of the International
Criminal Court were well-known and should be
recognized. The way in which the text had been revised
was objectionable.
45. Mr. Schlosser (Israel) expressed dissatisfaction
with the language in paragraph 12. His country had
supported a clear statement regarding gender-based
violence, and its request had not been properly
reflected in the final text. However, in the spirit of
cooperation, Israel would join the consensus.
46. Mr. Bené (Holy See) noted the need for States
and the international community to confront all acts of
sexual violence, especially those used to achieve
military, political or social ends. Failure to do so was a
breach of the responsibility of all States to protect their
citizens. The Holy See provided legal, social and
spiritual assistance to women who were abused.
Violence against women should be addressed not only
as a matter of law, but of justice as well.
47. Ms. Kurosaki (Japan) said that her Government
was making the strongest possible efforts to eradicate
violence against women. It joined in supporting the
draft resolution on the understanding that paragraph 11
did not conflict with the principle of discretionary
prosecution, which meant that due consideration would
be given to the gravity of the offence and the
circumstances under which it had been committed. Her
country understood that in efforts to bring perpetrators
of violence against women to justice, victims must be
protected.
48. Mr. Cardoso (Brazil) said his country was not
satisfied with the changes to paragraph 18 and also
disagreed with the way in which the changes had been
made at the last minute. The importance of the
International Criminal Court should not be
downgraded. Nonetheless, Brazil would support the
draft resolution.
49. Ms. Tomic (Slovenia) said that her country was
traditionally a strong supporter of the draft resolution.
The last-minute change in paragraph 18 was
regrettable. Although the International Criminal Court
had not yet rendered any final judgments, it did make
an important contribution to ending impunity by
deterring atrocities through its indictments and ongoing
cases.
50. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico) said that the last-minute
changes in paragraph 18 were very unfortunate for
reasons already stated by other delegations and because
the changes had been made in a procedurally
inappropriate manner. However, due to the importance
of the issue, his country would maintain its
sponsorship.
51. Mr. Suárez (Colombia) said that, with regard to
paragraph 12, his country understood that the allusion
to the international community would not affect the
role of States in responding to and preventing human
rights violations in their territories, nor their role in
investigating, charging and punishing those
responsible. It was unfortunate that, during the
consultations on that paragraph, the proposal made by
Colombia had not been appropriately considered.
52. Ms. Hill (New Zealand) said that the
International Criminal Court did indeed make a
contribution to combating impunity for violence
against women. It was regrettable that the revised
wording of paragraph 18 had perhaps not been fully
discussed and understood, as the consultations had
been very brief.
53. Ms. Sapag (Chile) said that the draft resolution
was of historic significance for the Third Committee. It
was important that paragraph 18 should remain in the
operative section of the draft. The document would
contribute in a major way to the fight against impunity
for violence against women.
54. Ms. Phipps (United States of America) said that
General Assembly resolution 62/134 had called for a
report to help identify situations in which rape was
used to advance political and military objectives.
While paragraph 4 of the draft resolution under
consideration welcomed the report of the Secretary-
General on the intensification of efforts to eliminate all
forms of violence against women, that report in fact
said little about that egregious practice. Unfortunately,
highly politicized language and legal imprecisionA/C.3/63/SR.38
08-59018 8
detracted from paragraph 12, which should explicitly
focus on violence against women and girls.
55. The draft resolution focused on the need to end
impunity for serious crimes of violence against women
and girls, and paragraph 13 appropriately referred to an
important provision of Security Council resolution
1820 (2008), according to which amnesty should not
apply to crimes of sexual violence. The United States
understood the phrase “killing and maiming” in
paragraph 13 to refer to deliberate acts targeting
women and girls. As the International Criminal Court
had never tried or convicted even a single case, it could
not yet be said to play a significant role in ending
impunity for violence against women. Lastly, her
delegation understood that the reference in the third
preambular paragraph to the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and in the fourth preambular
paragraph to the International Conference on
Population and Development did not create any rights
and, in particular, did not create or recognize a right to
abortion. The references could not be interpreted to
constitute support for or endorsement or promotion of
abortion.
56. Ms. Giménez-Jiménez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that her delegation deplored the last-
minute changes to paragraph 18 and hoped that they
would not be a precedent. Nonetheless, her country
would remain a sponsor because of its commitment to
the issue.
57. Mr. Bennwik (Sweden) said that his delegation
also found deplorable the last-minute changes to
paragraph 18 in regard to the International Criminal
Court, but would remain a sponsor of the draft
resolution.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.