United Nations A/C.3/63/SR.39
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-third session
Official Records
Distr.: General
20 January 2009
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
08-59682 (E)
*0859682*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 39th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 11 November 2008, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Majoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)
later: Mr. Peralta (Vice-Chairman). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Paraguay)
later: Mr. Majoor (Chairman). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)
Contents
Agenda item 39: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 58: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 62: Elimination of racism and racial discrimination (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
Agenda item 63: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (continued)
Agenda item 61: Indigenous issues (continued)
Agenda item 97: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 98: International drug control (continued)A/C.3/63/SR.39
08-59682 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 39: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.56)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.56: Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
1. Mr. Michelsen (Norway), speaking on behalf of
the Nordic countries and the other sponsors, said that
the draft resolution was a consensus text. It reflected
the text of the draft resolution adopted the previous
year and underscored the responsibility of States for
ensuring the international protection of refugees. He
wished to make an oral revision to the text: in
paragraph 26, the words “the impact of those flows of
persons” should be replaced by “its serious impact”.
He hoped the draft resolution would be adopted by
consensus.
2. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following delegations wished to
join the sponsors: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Belarus, Benin, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cyprus, El Salvador, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iraq, Kenya, Lesotho,
Malawi, Malta, Mauritania, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Montenegro, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation, Senegal,
Serbia, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Tajikistan, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia.
3. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme-budget implications.
4. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following States had joined as sponsors:
Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Botswana, Cape
Verde, Greece, Mauritania, Thailand and Uruguay.
5. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.56, as orally revised,
was adopted.
6. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that his delegation
wished to explain its position on paragraph 16 of the
draft resolution, which referred to local integration as
one solution to refugee problems. That solution was
neither acceptable nor feasible in the case of Afghan
refugees in Pakistan. The large number of those
refugees and the protracted period of time involved had
placed a heavy strain on Pakistan’s resources. The
refugees were beyond the absorption capacity of a
developing country, particularly in view of the current
food crisis; the best solution was safe voluntary return.
The international community should also take its share
of the burden, for instance through third-country
resettlement. In so doing, it could help realize a new
stability in the region.
Agenda item 58: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.47 and L.57)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.47: Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights
7. Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had been omitted
from the list of original sponsors and announced that
Azerbaijan had become a sponsor. The draft resolution
constituted a landmark in the promotion and protection
of human rights because it created a new international
individual-complaint mechanism. In keeping with the
view that all human rights were universal and
indivisible, the proposed Optional Protocol would give
economic, social and cultural rights, the rights that
most directly affected individuals’ daily life, the same
status as that accorded to civil and political rights. The
text was a consensus text which, he hoped, would be
adopted by consensus.
8. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Honduras, Mongolia and Nicaragua
had become sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.57: Report of the Human
Rights Council
9. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking as a
sponsor on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that were members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and of the Group of African
States, said that the draft resolution, in recognition of
the work of the Human Rights Council, for example
the drafting of the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, took note of the report of the Council
(A/63/53 and Add.1) and endorsed the
recommendations contained therein. He was confident
that the draft resolution would be adopted by
consensus.A/C.3/63/SR.39
3 08-59682
10. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Costa Rica wished to join the sponsors.
Agenda item 62: Elimination of racism and racial
discrimination (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)
(A/C.3/63/L.49)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.49: Inadmissibility of
certain practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
11. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation), speaking
on behalf of the sponsors, said that Belarus, Ethiopia,
Kazakhstan, South Africa and Turkmenistan had
become sponsors of the draft resolution, the theme of
which was particularly relevant in the light of the
forthcoming Durban Review Conference. He expressed
profound concern at the growth of skinhead and
neo-Nazi groups, attempts to glorify the Nazi
movement or portray those who collaborated as
members of national liberation movements, and the
increase in the number of violent incidents attributable
to those phenomena, which must be combated at the
national and international levels.
12. He wished to make two revisions to the text: near
the end of paragraph 2, the words “or collaborated”
should be replaced with “and collaborated”; and in
paragraph 12, the words “within existing resources”
should be inserted following the word “prepare”.
13. As the seventieth anniversary of the beginning of
the Second World War approached, and given the
victory of the anti-Hitler coalition which had paved the
way for the founding of the United Nations, it would
be especially fitting for Member States to adopt the
draft resolution by consensus.
14. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Cape Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, Nicaragua
and Nigeria wished to join the sponsors.
Agenda item 63: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.48 and L.52)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L. 48: Universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination
15. Mr. Tarar (Pakistan), speaking on behalf of the
sponsors, said that the right to self-determination was
the basic human right of nations and the very
foundation for the enjoyment of all other human rights.
It was enshrined in the International Covenants on
Human Rights and had been reaffirmed at numerous
international conferences. The exercise of that right
had brought freedom to millions around the globe and
offered hope to those peoples still under colonial,
foreign or alien occupation. He said that Cameroon, the
Congo, Mali, Somalia and Thailand had become
sponsors and urged the Committee to once again adopt
the draft resolution by consensus.
16. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and
Namibia had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.52: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
17. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the name of Palestine had been omitted from the
list of sponsors.
18. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), speaking on a point of order,
requested that a corrigendum to the draft resolution
should be issued with the name of Palestine added to
the list of sponsors.
19. The Chairman said that the Secretariat had taken
due note of that request.
20. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the
sponsors, introduced the draft resolution, which
recalled the long wait of the Palestinian people for
their own State. Their right to an independent State had
been affirmed on numerous occasions by the United
Nations as well as by the International Court of Justice
in the context of its advisory opinion on the Israeli wall
in the West Bank. He said that Ecuador, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Montenegro, San Marino, Slovenia and
Togo had become sponsors and urged the Committee to
adopt the draft resolution by consensus, thereby
sending a message of solidarity to the Palestinian
people as they sought to assert their inalienable right to
a sovereign and viable State with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living in peace and security with Israel.
21. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following delegations wished to
join the sponsors: Bulgaria, Cape Verde, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, the Republic of
Moldova, Rwanda, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Timor-Leste.A/C.3/63/SR.39
08-59682 4
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1, L.21,
L.22, L.27, L.30-L.32, L.34, L.38 and L.39)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1: Moratorium on
the use of the death penalty
22. Mr. Jesus (Angola) introduced draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1 on behalf of the sponsors, which
had been joined by Algeria, the Congo and Haiti, and
said that a moratorium on the use of the death penalty
would give Governments time to take measures aimed
at abolishing the death penalty. His delegation
therefore welcomed the holding of national debates on
the death penalty in a number of countries. However, it
was clear that such processes took time, because it was
necessary to amend national legislation. Given the
importance of General Assembly resolution 62/149, the
draft resolution requested the Secretary-General to
provide a report on its implementation at the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly.
23. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Dominican Republic had joined the
sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.21: Regional arrangements
for the promotion and protection of human rights
24. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme-budget implications.
25. Mr. Nihon (Belgium), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, made several oral
revisions to the text. Paragraph 6 (e) should now read,
“The recent decision by the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) to develop a mechanism for
the promotion and protection of human rights;”. A new
subparagraph 6 (g) should be inserted, to read,
“Ongoing initiatives to further develop arrangements
for the promotion and protection of human rights by
the States members of the Common Market of the
South (MERCOSUR);”. The former subparagraph
6 (g) should become 6 (h) and the former subparagraph
6 (h) should become 6 (i). In the new subparagraph
6 (i), after the words “Council of Europe”, the words
“and its various human rights bodies and mechanisms”
should be inserted.
26. The following countries had joined the sponsors
since the draft resolution had been introduced: Albania,
Andorra, Australia, Canada, Chile, the Czech Republic,
El Salvador, Japan, Malta and Turkey.
27. The draft resolution welcomed the exchanges
between the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and
intergovernmental and regional bodies, as well as
between the human rights treaty bodies and the
relevant regional organizations. It also mentioned
recent developments within ASEAN and in the
MERCOSUR region.
28. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had joined as sponsors of
the draft resolution: Angola, Azerbaijan, Brazil, Cape
Verde, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Ghana,
Honduras, Indonesia, Israel, Liberia, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Peru, the Republic of Moldova, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Uruguay.
29. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking in
explanation of position, said that his country supported
the draft resolution. Cuba also associated itself with
paragraph 9, particularly the last part, but noted that
the decision of the High Commissioner’s Office to
strengthen national protection had not taken into
account intergovernmental agreements or the principle
of consent for the High Commissioner’s field
operations. Furthermore, it applied to developing
countries only, leaving aside the universality of human
rights, and assumed that only developing countries
needed support to strengthen human rights. Cuba
would be watching closely to ensure that that
deficiency was not repeated.
30. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.21, as orally revised,
was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.22: Combating defamation
of religions
31. Ms. Awino Kafeeo (Uganda), introducing the
draft resolution on behalf of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the other sponsors, said that
there had been a disturbing increase in xenophobia and
racial violence. Such discrimination prevented
individuals from exercising their basic human right to
practise their religion freely without fear of reprisals.
Given that the draft resolution denounced the
defamation of all religions, it was regrettable that someA/C.3/63/SR.39
5 08-59682
delegations had not expressed their support for it. That
approach was surprising, given that all Member States
had supported the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, which also aimed to prevent the
defamation of religions, religious values, beliefs and
cultures. Her delegation called on Member States to
support the draft resolution and noted that a revised
text would be issued.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.27: Human rights and
extreme poverty
32. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme-budget implications.
33. Mr. Pérez (Peru) said that the following
countries had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution:
Argentina, Belarus, Colombia, the Congo, Cuba,
Kuwait and Pakistan.
34. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had joined as sponsors of
the draft resolution: Andorra, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Bhutan, Cameroon, Cape Verde, the Dominican
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Iraq, Kenya, Lesotho,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nigeria,
Thailand and Tunisia.
35. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.27 was adopted.
36. Ms. Phipps (United States of America) said that,
while her country joined the consensus on the draft
resolution, it had some reservations. In the first
preambular paragraph, the reference to reaffirming
certain international instruments referred to the
obligations of States parties under those instruments. It
did not imply that States had obligations under human
rights instruments to which they were not party.
37. Countries had primary responsibility for their
own development. That was at the heart of country
ownership and leadership. Principles which remained
constant regardless of changing events or crises
included not shirking commitments to good
governance, sound policies and international support to
national efforts towards sustained development and
fighting poverty.
38. Ms. Hoosen (South Africa) said that extreme
poverty and hunger were major challenges to
developing countries, particularly in sub-Saharan
Africa, and especially in view of the current food,
energy and economic crises. Human rights and extreme
poverty should be broadly defined to include such
issues as marginalization, economic exclusion, lack of
social cohesion and national integration, and
elimination of racial discrimination. Regrettably, the
draft resolution did not adequately deal with that.
Extreme poverty could not be addressed effectively
without the necessary linkages to development issues.
The sponsors had failed to give due consideration to
those issues.
39. There were also concerns regarding the terms of
reference of the independent expert on the question of
human rights and extreme poverty. Her mandate
authorized her to assess the implementation of the
Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of
Poverty without contextualizing a constructive
environment in which it should take place. However,
the Second Decade could not be meaningful without a
clear programme of action setting out a vision with
achievable objectives supporting concrete efforts to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals and
eradicate poverty. Any attempt to locate the mandate in
processes peripheral to the work of the Human Rights
Council was unacceptable and tantamount to “mandate
creep”. The draft resolution failed to address some core
issues related to human rights and extreme poverty.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.30: The right to development
40. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking as a
sponsor on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that were members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced the draft resolution
and recalled that the Declaration on the Right to
Development confirmed that the right to development
was an inalienable human right and the prerogative
both of nations and of individuals. Given the urgent
need to make further progress on the right to
development, his delegation hoped that the United
Nations would review the issue of establishing a
legally binding instrument on the right to development;
it also hoped that the Committee would adopt the draft
resolution by consensus.
41. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominica and Somalia had
joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.31: Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures
42. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking as a
sponsor on behalf of the States Members of the UnitedA/C.3/63/SR.39
08-59682 6
Nations that were members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced the draft resolution
and said that some States still made use of unilateral
coercive measures in contravention of the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States. Unilateral
coercive measures impeded the full realization of
social and economic development and hindered the
well-being of the population in the affected countries,
especially women and children. His delegation
therefore called on all Member States to stop using
such measures, which contravened international human
rights law.
43. Mr. Peralta (Paraguay), Vice-Chairman, took the
Chair.
44. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that China and El Salvador had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.32: Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights
45. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking as a
sponsor on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that were members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, introduced the draft resolution
and said that increased international cooperation and
dialogue would undoubtedly contribute to the
promotion and protection of human rights. In addition,
the promotion and protection of human rights should
be regulated through a framework based on the
principles of universality, non-selectivity, objectivity
and transparency in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. His delegation hoped that the draft
resolution would be adopted by consensus.
46. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that China and El Salvador had joined the sponsors.
47. Mr. Majoor (Netherlands) resumed the Chair.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.34: Elimination of all forms
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion
or belief
48. Ms. Gasri (France), speaking as a sponsor on
behalf of the European Union, introduced the draft
resolution and said that the sponsors had been joined
by Argentina, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Costa Rica,
El Salvador, Liechtenstein, San Marino and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of). The aim of the draft
resolution was to provide a global approach to the
implementation of all human rights instruments aimed
at eliminating discrimination based on religion or
belief and to support the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief. It was
essential that Member States should step up their
efforts to guarantee freedom of belief by promoting
education and dialogue. Her delegation hoped that the
draft resolution would be adopted by consensus.
49. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the sponsors had been joined by Albania, Benin,
Cape Verde, Colombia, Cyprus, Ecuador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama,
the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova and Serbia.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.38: Protection of migrants
50. Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, which had been
joined by Belarus, Colombia, Honduras, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Tajikistan and Uruguay. The draft resolution
urged States to promote and protect the human rights of
all migrants, irrespective of their legal status, and
expressed concern that the measures adopted by some
States did not fully respect those rights. States were
requested to adopt measures to protect the human
rights of migrants in transit and to make every effort to
keep families together. The draft resolution welcomed
the measures taken by some States that allowed
migrant families to integrate into the host countries
within a framework of harmony, tolerance and respect.
Her delegation hoped the draft resolution would be
adopted by consensus.
51. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) noted
that the following States had joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution: Algeria, Armenia, Benin, the
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Guinea, Haiti, Iraq, Morocco, Nigeria, Sri Lanka and
the Sudan.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.39: Protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism
52. Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican
Republic, Hungary, Israel, Mali, Malta, Nicaragua,
Paraguay, Senegal, Serbia and Uruguay had joined the
sponsors.A/C.3/63/SR.39
7 08-59682
53. She said that the need to protect the population
from terrorism did not justify the suspension of human
rights, which should be the basis for any
counter-terrorism measures. The draft resolution
furthered that aim by calling for the continued
implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy; recognizing the need to
continue ensuring fair and clear procedures in the
United Nations sanctions regime; and welcoming the
Security Council’s review of the Consolidated List.
She hoped that the draft resolution would be adopted
without a vote.
54. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Angola, Armenia, Benin, Cape Verde,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq,
Montenegro, Nigeria, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had
joined the sponsors.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/63/L.26 and L.33)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.26: Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
55. Mr. Fieschi (France), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the European Union, Japan and
the other sponsors, said that despite some positive
signs, large-scale systematic violations of human rights
continued to take place in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The draft resolution urged that
State to, inter alia, ensure that those responsible for
violations were brought to justice, tackle the root
causes of refugee outflows, and cooperate with the
relevant international human rights mechanisms. He
urged all Member States to draw attention to the
problem, and hoped that the draft resolution would
gain the widest possible support.
56. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Montenegro had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.33: Situation of human
rights in Myanmar
57. Ms. Gasri (France), speaking on behalf of the
European Union and the other sponsors, said that the
draft resolution strongly called on the authorities of
Burma/Myanmar to respect human rights and cooperate
fully with human rights organizations.
58. Mr. Han (Myanmar), speaking on a point of
order, asked the Chairman to request speakers to use
the official name of his country.
59. The Chairman reminded all delegations to use
the official names of countries when referring to
Member States.
60. Ms. Gasri (France), continuing her statement,
said that, despite some positive measures, previous
United Nations resolutions on the issue had not been
implemented. A wide range of human rights abuses
continued to take place in the State in question, and no
measures had been taken to prosecute those responsible
for the violent repression of peaceful demonstrations.
She therefore hoped that the General Assembly would
take action once again.
61. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Montenegro had joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.37)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/37: Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol
thereto
62. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme-budget
implications of the draft resolution in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, said that the Secretariat had informed the
Third Committee in an oral statement at the sixty-first
session that the financial implications of the entry into
force of the Convention during the biennium
2008-2009 would be $1,511,200. In paragraph 23.15 of
the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2008-2009 (A/62/6 (Sect. 23)), the Secretary-General
had informed the General Assembly that the estimates
for section 23 were likely to be revised during the
current biennium as a result of entry into force of the
Convention.
63. The Secretariat was currently finalizing the
resource requirements of the departments responsible
for implementing of the Convention and to service the
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
established under the Convention. The revised
estimates for all the sections concerned, particularly,
sections 2, 23, 28D and 28E, which would include the
estimated requirements under the programme budgetA/C.3/63/SR.39
08-59682 8
for the biennium 2008-2009 and the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011, would
be submitted shortly to the General Assembly.
64. With regard to paragraph 8 of the draft resolution,
attention was drawn to section VI of General Assembly
resolution 45/248 B, in which the Assembly reaffirmed
that the Fifth Committee was the appropriate Main
Committee entrusted with responsibilities for
administrative and budgetary matters and reaffirmed
the role of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions.
65. Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) said that the following
countries had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution:
Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bolivia,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Greece, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan,
Kenya, Latvia, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mauritius, Montenegro, Morocco, Nigeria, the
Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Togo,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Republic
of Tanzania and Yemen. The Convention had been
signed in record time by 136 States and ratified by 41.
It affirmed the commitment of the international
community to promote the human rights of all persons
with disabilities.
66. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had joined as sponsors:
Burkina Faso, the Comoros, Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, the
Niger and Zambia.
67. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.37 was adopted.
Agenda item 61: Indigenous issues (continued)
(A/C.3/63/L.17/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.17/Rev.1: Indigenous issues
68. Ms. Taracena Secaira (Guatemala), introducing
the draft resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said it
was important to foster dialogue between the
Committee and the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights and fundamental freedoms of
indigenous people. During negotiations, many
delegations without representation in Geneva had
stressed their particular need for such dialogue. The
new paragraph 2 would extend involvement in the
midterm assessment to every Member State with
indigenous people, the relevant United Nations
organizations and mechanisms, indigenous groups and
other stakeholders. Paragraph 3 had been introduced
during negotiations in order to further involve
indigenous groups in the process. She hoped that
Member States would support the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations.
69. She said that Cuba, France, Hungary, Sweden and
Uruguay had joined the sponsors.
70. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) noted
that the following States had also joined the sponsors:
Belize, Benin, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Dominica, Iraq, Madagascar, the Philippines and
Slovenia.
Agenda item 97: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.10/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.10/Rev.1: Strengthening the
United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme, in particular its technical cooperation
capacity
71. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme-budget
implications, said that his remarks concerned
paragraphs 12, 13, 16 and 18 of the draft resolution. In
reference to the request in paragraph 12, the resources
to provide the required support to the conferences of
the parties to the two conventions were included in the
programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009 under
section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council affairs and conference management and
section 16, International drug control, crime and
terrorism prevention and criminal justice. The initial
appropriation for the biennium for section 16 was
$36,819,000.
72. The requests contained in paragraph 13 of the
draft resolution would call for an increase in technical
assistance to strengthen international cooperation in
preventing and combating terrorism. Implementation of
the activities laid out in paragraph 13 would be subject
to the availability of extrabudgetary resources.
Accordingly, adoption of the draft resolution would not
give rise to any financial implications under the
programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009.
Paragraphs 12, 16 and 18 dealt with budgetary and
administrative questions, which were the prerogative of
the Fifth Committee.
73. Mr. Mantovani (Italy), speaking on behalf of the
sponsors, said that organized crime interfered with orA/C.3/63/SR.39
9 08-59682
superseded the normal functioning of public
institutions, altered the functioning of the market and
impacted legitimate economic activities. Its
transnational dimension made it necessary for States to
coordinate their response. The United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
was the first international instrument to fight that
scourge. The purposes of the draft resolution were to
highlight the importance of the fight against
transnational organized crime and to reaffirm the
support of Member States for the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. Innovations in the draft
resolution included references to conferences and
resolutions on combating terrorism, human trafficking,
cybercrime and violence against women.
74. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had joined as sponsors of
the draft resolution: Albania, Algeria, Angola,
Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Cape Verde, the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, the Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
the Sudan, Swaziland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Uruguay.
75. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.10/Rev.1 was
adopted.
76. Ms. Giménez-Jiménez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that her country had joined the
consensus but had reservations regarding certain
references in the preamble and in paragraph 3; there
should be no direct link between terrorism and
organized crime, because they had different motives.
As a result, there was a disregard for due process and
for the presumption of innocence in the draft
resolution.
77. Mr. Emadi (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
his country had joined the consensus. However, in
reference to paragraph 4, it was not necessary or
appropriate to incorporate the reference to regional
organizations with limited membership into General
Assembly resolutions, including the one just adopted.
The recommendations of regional organizations could
not be regarded as obligatory for States which did not
belong to those organizations.
Agenda item 98: International drug control
(continued) (A/C.3/63/L.8/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.8/Rev.1: International
cooperation against the world drug problem
78. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme-budget
implications, said that his remarks concerned
paragraphs 27, 30, 38, 41 and 42 of the draft
resolution. Implementation of the activities enumerated
in paragraphs 27, 30 and 41 would entail the provision
of technical assistance funded from extrabudgetary
resources. The Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime had stated that
extrabudgetary resources for the biennium 2008-2009
were projected at $30 million more than for the
previous biennium.
79. In reference to paragraphs 38 and 42, the General
Assembly had approved increased regular-budget
resources under section 16 of the programme budget,
which included the establishment of a new P-2 post in
the secretariat of the International Narcotics Control
Board. Hence, the draft resolution would entail no
further appropriation for the biennium 2008-2009.
80. Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico), speaking on behalf of
the sponsors, said that the following countries had
joined as sponsors: Antigua and Barbuda, the
Dominican Republic, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Slovakia, the
Sudan, Sweden and Uruguay.
81. She said that, in combating the scourge of drugs,
the international community must respect the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and the
legal equality of all States.
82. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had joined as sponsors:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Armenia, the Bahamas,
Bangladesh, the Comoros, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cyprus, Egypt, Eritrea, Iceland, Iraq, Israel, Jamaica,
Japan, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Mali, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova, Sierra Leone, Swaziland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the United
Republic of Tanzania.
83. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.8/Rev.1 was adopted.
84. Mr. Salov (Russian Federation) said that, while
his country had decided to support the consensus onA/C.3/63/SR.39
08-59682 10
the draft resolution, it would not join as a sponsor. Yet
again, the issue of strengthening international
cooperation to halt the global threat of narcotics
production in Afghanistan was not adequately reflected
in the draft resolution. Over the past two years, the
resolutions had moved away from support for
international cooperation in resolving the worldwide
drug problem, with references to international
cooperation disappearing from the text.
85. It was disappointing that the draft resolution
contained no reference to support for future efforts to
combat opium-poppy cultivation in Afghanistan and
trafficking in narcotics originating in Afghanistan. It
was not simply a question of singling out a particular
country for mention; given the share of the global
narcotics market occupied by opiates from
Afghanistan, as well as the continued expansion of
narcobusiness and terrorism there, the threat from
Afghanistan was in fact global in nature. To
underestimate it would be a serious error.
86. Likewise, it was a mistake not to refer in the draft
resolution to Security Council resolution 1817 (2008),
on the situation in Afghanistan, in which the Security
Council had, for the first time, called upon Member
States to strengthen the monitoring of the international
trade in chemical precursors.
87. Mr. Pak Gil Yon (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea), speaking in exercise of the right of reply,
said that his country totally rejected draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.26, entitled “Situation of human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”,
introduced by France on behalf of the European Union.
It was a product of political fraud and lacked all
objectivity and fairness. Systematic human rights
abuses of the type described in the draft resolution
were non-existent. People in his country fully enjoyed
their human rights.
88. If the European Union was truly interested in
protecting human rights worldwide, they should
question the daily killing of innocent people in
Afghanistan, Iraq and the Occupied Palestinian
Territories. With the universal periodic review
currently operational, the country-specific draft
resolution was an example of anachronistic, cold-war
thinking. The sponsors should cease submitting
resolutions which led to confrontation and mistrust,
and other Member States were urged to reject such
overly politicized resolutions.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.