United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.47
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
19 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-64238 (E)
*1064238*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 47th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 18 November 2010, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/65/SR.47
10-64238 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.31: Missing persons
1. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution contained no programme budget
implications.
2. Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan) said that Angola,
Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, India,
Israel, Panama, Sudan, Uganda and Ukraine had joined
the sponsors. The draft resolution had received broad
support from Member States and helped to increase
attention on the important issue of missing persons.
3. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.31 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.34/Rev.1: Protection
of migrants
4. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution contained no programme budget
implications.
5. Mr. González (Mexico) said that Brazil, Guyana
and Portugal had joined the sponsors. Mexico was
convinced of the cultural and economic benefits of
international migration for all countries affected by it.
It was also necessary to recognize the challenges posed
by migration, to take into account a human rights
perspective, and to address such worrisome trends as
the criminalization of international migration. He
thanked all delegations for their open and constructive
participation and hoped that spirit would prevail in
coming years.
6. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Algeria, Angola, Burkina Faso, Cape
Verde, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Egypt, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Morocco,
Nigeria and Turkey had joined the sponsors.
7. Mr. Monterey (El Salvador) highlighted the
importance of the draft resolution for his country,
which had been affected by migration at all levels of
society. Migrants from El Salvador, which made up
1 per cent of all migrants worldwide, maintained an
important link to their communities of origin, as
demonstrated by the constant flow of funds sent back
to those communities. At the global level, the
contribution of migrants helped lift their communities
out of poverty and provide them with health care and
education, among other services. His country therefore
supported the resolution, in the context of its support
for migration more broadly.
8. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.34/Rev.1 was
adopted.
9. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his delegation had been able to join consensus on the
draft resolution after negotiations had resulted in a text
that more accurately reflected the rights and
responsibilities of States. The principle established
under international law that States had the sovereign
right to control admission to their territory and to
regulate the admission and expulsion of foreign
nationals was implicit in any discussion of
international migration. That said, his country took
seriously the responsibility to respect the human rights
of migrants and to provide legal protections to aliens
within its territory, in accordance with international
law, and urged other States to do the same.
10. The attention given to migration at the United
Nations must not be sidetracked by undue focus on
bilateral legal matters. As just one example, reference
to a specific case in preambular paragraph 9 diverted
attention from the serious multilateral reflection and
action required on the issue and did not promote
constructive cooperation in protecting the human rights
of migrants.
11. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the
stabilization and association process countries Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Montenegro; and, in
addition, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine, said that the European Union was committed
to protecting the rights of migrants, regardless of their
legal or migration status, and its migration policies
were consistent with the human rights obligations of its
member States. The European Union therefore
welcomed the resolution as a valuable initiative to spell
out norms for the treatment and protection of migrants.
Given the vulnerability of migrant children, their
protection was of paramount importance.A/C.3/65/SR.47
3 10-64238
12. The status of immigrants residing legally in
European Union member States allowed for access to
education, health assistance, housing and appropriate
social security or pension. Although irregular migrants
were not automatically granted the right to reside in
European Union member States, their human rights
were fully respected. The fundamental distinction
between regular and irregular migration was an integral
element of the European Union migration policy.
Combating irregular migration, particularly when
organized by human trafficking networks that were an
affront to human dignity, was one of its priorities,
hence the introduction by a number of its member
States of criminal penalties for breaches of national
immigration law. Migrants charged with breaches of
criminal law had the same rights as other defendants;
in that connection, the European Union shared the
concerns expressed in preambular paragraph 19 that
penalties and treatment for irregular migrants should be
commensurate to the offence committed. It also shared
concerns expressed about legislation, measures and
practices that denied irregular migrants the full
enjoyment of their human rights.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.47: Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
13. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
resolution contained no programme budget
implications.
14. Ms. Fahmy (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that the
Movement believed that a cooperative and
non-confrontational approach must be adopted to deal
with human rights situations, in order to provide States
with the resources needed to implement their
international obligations domestically and without
foreign interference. To that end, the Human Rights
Council had been established in 2005, as had its
universal periodic review mechanism, to eliminate the
selectivity, politicization and double standards that had
marred the work of the Human Rights Commission.
15. At a recent high-level summit, the Movement had
emphasized the role of the Human Rights Council as
the organ responsible for consideration of human rights
situations in all countries. The Heads of State and
Government had also expressed deep concern at the
Committee’s continued practice of selective adoption
of country-specific resolutions. Moreover, they had
reiterated the importance of ensuring the
implementation of the universal periodic review of the
Council as an action-oriented cooperative mechanism,
and urged all member States of the Movement to
continue to support States under review. Therefore, the
Movement did not recognize any justification for
creating a parallel track to the Human Rights Council
to deal with human rights situations, particularly since
those resolutions were targeting only developing
countries. Country-specific resolutions were contrary
to international good governance, given that States
proposing them were almost certain that the targeted
States would be unable to respond with similar draft
resolutions regarding human rights situations. For all
those reasons, the member States of the Movement
would vote against the draft resolution.
16. Mr. Lambert (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, Japan and the other sponsors, said
that Palau and Turkey had joined the sponsors. Despite
annual General Assembly resolutions on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea since 2005, grave, widespread and systematic
violations of human rights still prevailed, as
underscored by several United Nations reports.
17. While the draft resolution did take into account
positive steps taken on the part of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in the previous year, it was
regrettable that no substantive changes had yet come
about on the ground.
18. Given that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea had made no substantial effort to meet earlier
requests made by the international community, the
General Assembly should use the draft resolution to
more strongly urge the Government to put an
immediate end to human rights violations and to
cooperate with all human rights special procedures.
Failure to react would send the political signal that the
situation had improved or that concern had decreased,
neither of which was the case.
19. The European Union would have preferred a
negotiation process with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea on the human rights issues
mentioned in the resolution, but it had refused to
engage in discussions. As he understood that aA/C.3/65/SR.47
10-64238 4
recorded vote would be taken on the resolution, his
delegation, along with all other sponsors, would vote in
favour.
20. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Samoa had joined the sponsors.
21. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that his delegation categorically rejected
the draft resolution as an outcome of the political plot
of the United States of America and its followers and
an illegal, slanderous document that infringed on the
sovereignty of his country. The so-called concern of
the European Union over human rights violations was
nothing but a pretext to interfere in the internal affairs
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. His
country had started a bilateral dialogue on human
rights and engaged in relevant cooperation with the
European Union in 2001, but the process had broken
down in 2003 when the European Union had presented
an anti-Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
resolution to United Nations human rights forums, the
first of several confrontational resolutions. The
European Union appeared to expect that his country’s
system could be changed overnight in its own image. It
was clear that the main sponsors of the draft resolution
sought, in fact, not to promote human rights but instead
to change the ideology and system of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Such an expectation was a
gross miscalculation, for neither slander nor plots
would bring down the Korean-style socialist system,
which had been chosen and defended by the Korean
people at the cost of their lives. Indeed, the
Government’s pursuit of people-centred policies had
enabled his country to advance along the road it had
chosen despite persistent political pressure, economic
blockades and foreign military threats.
22. Countries that occupied others by force of arms
and massacred millions of innocent civilians were the
worst human rights abusers, and their criticism of the
situation in his country made a mockery of human
rights and cast shame on humanity. His delegation
requested that a recorded vote should be taken and
expected all countries that aspired to justice, truth and
peace to vote against the politically motivated draft
resolution.
23. Ms. Kolontai (Belarus), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that her country, as a
matter of principle, had always opposed politicized
country-specific resolutions, which undermined the
principles of objectivity and non-selectivity in the
consideration of human rights issues. The annual
adoption of country-specific resolutions by the
Committee duplicated the work of the Human Rights
Council. Moreover, while the Council’s analysis of
human rights situations in different countries was
based on a constructive and mutually respectful
dialogue, the Committee’s practice failed to build a
climate of trust or respect for the specific historical and
cultural traditions of individual countries. Belarus
would therefore vote against the draft resolution.
24. Mr. Kodama (Japan) said that Japan believed
that human rights issues should generally be addressed
through constructive dialogue and cooperation.
However, given the grave concern of the international
community over the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, his delegation
urged that country to address the issues raised in the
resolution, including its persistent refusal to engage in
dialogue with the Special Rapporteur or in technical
cooperation with the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and its
failure to resolve the issue of its abduction of Japanese
citizens in the 1970s and 1980s. A grave violation of
human rights, those abductions were a matter of utmost
concern for his Government.
25. Japan considered the universal periodic review
mechanism a very effective tool for reviewing country
situations. However, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea had not yet taken action in response to the
results of its review, hence his delegation’s concern
that the mechanism was not working effectively in that
particular case. In such grave situations, the
international community must join the Human Rights
Council and express its concern through the General
Assembly, as such action could bring about an
improvement in the human rights situation of the
country in question.
Statements made in explanation of vote before
the voting
26. Ms. Herrera Caseiro (Cuba) said that it would
vote against the draft resolution, in line with its
traditional principled position against country-specific
resolutions. Political motivations had no bearing on
human rights issues. Double standards in consideration
of human rights situations had led to the demise of the
discredited Commission on Human Rights,
demonstrating that genuine and impartial internationalA/C.3/65/SR.47
5 10-64238
cooperation was the only legitimate means of
improving human rights situations.
27. Ms. Murillo Ruin (Costa Rica) said that the
Human Rights Council had the main competency in
dealing with human rights situations, as it had the tools
to examine specific cases, chief among them the
universal periodic review mechanism.
28. Mr. Ali (Sudan) said that his delegation
encouraged the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to continue its efforts to implement the
recommendations of the Human Rights Council. He
called for the practice of presenting country-specific
resolutions to be discontinued, as human rights-related
resolutions fell under the mandate of the Human Rights
Council. The Sudan believed that it was the
responsibility of countries to cooperate with the
Human Rights Council and to strengthen its role, and
to avoid use of United Nations human rights
mechanisms to exert political pressure. In light of those
concerns, his delegation would vote against the
resolution.
29. Ms. Abubakar (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
expressed deep concern that some countries continued
to use human rights as a pretext to impose their laws
and political ideologies on others. Human rights issues
had, regrettably, become a means to pressure others to
achieve political ends. No country could be said to be
perfect in its promotion and protection of human rights,
and the time had come to refuse the politicization of
human rights issues and to resolve them on the basis of
mutual respect and acknowledgement of the
specificities of different peoples. Based on its
principled position against selective country-specific
resolutions, her delegation would vote against the draft
resolution. Its vote, however, must not be interpreted as
an endorsement of human rights violations anywhere in
the world.
30. Ms. Hoang Thi Than Nga (Viet Nam) reiterated
her country’s principled position against the
politicization of human rights issues, hence its
intention to vote against the draft resolution, which it
considered counterproductive to dialogue between
member States. The universal periodic review
mechanism of the Human Rights Council was based on
national ownership and dialogue. Viet Nam welcomed
the universal periodic review of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in 2009 and acknowledged
the Government’s efforts to address human rights
issues, particularly given the economic difficulties it
faced. She reaffirmed her country’s readiness to share
its relevant experiences and expressed the hope that the
issue of abductions of foreign nationals would soon be
resolved.
31. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that her delegation would vote against
the draft resolution, in accordance with the principles
of its foreign policy, which opposed the selective
practice of presenting country-specific resolutions.
That practice aimed to condemn and criminalize the
States targeted by such resolutions, subjecting them,
year after year, to manipulation and political pressure.
The General Assembly was not the proper space to
debate human rights issues and should not be used as a
tool to perpetrate such practices. The Human Rights
Council was the entity responsible for examining
human rights issues in an objective and non-selective
manner.
32. Ms. Zhang Dan (China) said that her delegation
would vote against the draft resolution, as it believed
that human rights issues should be addressed through
constructive dialogue. Country-specific resolutions
only served to politicize issues and provoke
confrontation. She welcomed the participation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the
universal periodic review process and its cooperation
with United Nations development agencies and called
on the international community to adopt a pragmatic
approach and provide humanitarian assistance to help
the country with the economic and social development
challenges it faced.
33. Ms. Bhoroma (Zimbabwe) said that country-
specific resolutions were not intended to promote
human rights, but instead aimed at advancing the
political interests and power of developed countries.
Such resolutions were also counter-productive, as they
entrenched polarization between and among nations.
Moreover, those measures undermined the credibility
and integrity of the universal periodic review process,
which was the agreed framework for addressing human
rights issues in all countries. Based on that principled
position, her delegation would vote against the draft
resolution and all subsequent country-specific draft
resolutions before the Committee.
34. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia), calling for a
non-confrontational approach, said that human rights
issues should not be exploited for political purposes.A/C.3/65/SR.47
10-64238 6
Human rights must be addressed within a global
context based on respect for national sovereignty. His
delegation would vote against the draft resolution,
which selectively targeted a single country. He
encouraged all States to use the universal periodic
review process to improve the protection of human
rights in a fair manner. He urged the Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to resolve
its outstanding issues with neighbouring countries.
35. Mr. Rai (Nepal) said that his delegation shared
the concerns expressed in the draft resolution,
particularly in paragraph 2 regarding the abduction of
foreigners. He called on the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to resolve
those concerns. However, the universal periodic review
was the appropriate mechanism to address human
rights concerns. The international community should
engage more constructively on the issues proposed by
the United Nations human rights framework, including
the Human Rights Council. His delegation would
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution and
subsequent country-specific draft resolutions.
36. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.47.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada,
Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Oman, Russian Federation, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Mali,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Yemen, Zambia.
37. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.50 was adopted by
100 votes to 18, with 60 abstentions.1
38. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that his delegation
took note of the increased cooperation between the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the United Nations system, particularly with
regard to humanitarian assistance. He urged Member
States to address the lack of resources for such
activities. His delegation remained concerned about the
human rights situation in the country, particularly
limitations on access to food, water, sanitation and
health services, as well as the restrictions on civil and
political rights. Although the Government had
participated in the universal periodic review process,
its engagement with United Nations bodies and the
__________________
1 The delegations of Chile, Somalia and Tuvalu
subsequently indicated that they had wished to vote in
favour of the draft resolution. The delegation of Georgia
subsequently indicated that, had it been present, it would
have voted in favour of the draft resolution.A/C.3/65/SR.47
7 10-64238
transparency of related activities remained to be
improved. Regarding the abduction of Japanese
citizens, he urged the Government to take concrete
steps to resolve the situation, including by allowing for
the return of abductees.
39. Despite those concerns, his delegation believed
that country-specific draft resolutions were the product
of a deficient process. Such resolutions were the only
ones considered by the Third Committee that did not
undergo a transparent consultation process.
Furthermore, the fact that only certain human rights
situations were addressed reinforced the view that the
treatment of human rights issues was selective and
politicized. The Human Rights Council was best
equipped to examine such manners in a holistic,
multilateral and depoliticized way.
40. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) said that the fact that
his delegation had voted in favour of a country-specific
resolution for the first time was not to be taken as a
change of position on that matter, but rather as an
expression of support for a friendly country on the
issue of abductions. The draft resolution remained
selective and would not improve conditions on the
ground in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
No State was exempt from human rights violations or
had the authority to advise another regarding human
rights matters. That was the role of the Human Rights
Council, whose efforts would no doubt lead the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the
negotiating table and improve the situation in the
country.
41. Mr. Kleib (Indonesia) said that the universal
periodic review was the appropriate mechanism for
reviewing the situation in all countries on an equal
basis and had been created for that purpose. As such, it
must be fully supported by Member States in order to
eliminate all manner of selectivity. His delegation
recognized that the draft resolution raised human rights
issues that needed to be addressed and hoped that the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea would give them due consideration. However,
his delegation was not in a position to vote for a
country-specific draft resolution and had abstained in
the voting.
42. Mr. Vimal (India) said that, as noted in
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, the abduction of
nationals from one country by another was
unacceptable. His delegation sympathized with the
victims of abductions and hoped for a timely resolution
of the issue.
43. Mr. Saravenan (Singapore) said that country-
specific resolutions were highly selective, driven by
political considerations and inherently divisive.
Country-specific human rights issues should be taken
up under the universal periodic review process, which
had been devised precisely for that function. Singapore
had therefore abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution and would be doing the same for all
subsequent country-specific draft resolutions.
However, Singapore’s abstention should not be
interpreted as expressing a position on the human
rights situation of the country concerned.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.48/Rev.1: Situation of
human rights in Myanmar
44. The Chair drew the Committee’s attention to the
statement of programme budget implications of the
draft resolution (A/C.3/65/L.64/Rev.1).
45. Mr. Lambert (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union and the other sponsors, said that
Turkey had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
The text had been updated to reflect the recent
elections and the release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,
which was a significant measure the General Assembly
had called for during the many years of her arbitrary
house arrest. As in previous years, the text was based
on the concerns expressed in the reports of the
Secretary-General and the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar. The draft
resolution strongly urged the Government to release
the more than 2,100 prisoners of conscience still being
held and to end politically motivated arrests. The draft
resolution was also an important aspect of international
engagement with the Government in that it allowed the
Secretary-General to continue to follow the situation in
the country, particularly during the post-election phase,
through the work of his Special Adviser on Myanmar.
46. It was unfortunate that, despite the appeals of the
international community, the Government had not
ensured that the elections were free, fair and inclusive.
Irregularities had been reported, including restrictions
on registration of parties, detention of activists,
cancellation of elections in ethnic areas and unequal
access to campaign funding. Fraud, including advance
voting arrangements, had also been reported. Against
that background, the draft resolution called on theA/C.3/65/SR.47
10-64238 8
Government to begin an inclusive post-election phase
with a view to consolidating a legitimate, civilian
system of government, based on the rule of law and
respect for human rights.
47. A genuine transition to democracy and national
reconciliation was not possible without an
improvement in the human rights situation. Violations
continued with impunity, including displacement, use
of child soldiers, targeting of civilians in military
operations, forced labour, arbitrary detentions and
discrimination against ethnic minorities. For those
reasons, the draft resolution urged the Government to
take steps to address justice and accountability without
delay. Such cooperation would be evidence of a serious
intention to transition to democracy. The draft
resolution also urged cooperation with the international
community, including by engaging with the Special
Rapporteur and the Special Adviser.
48. The draft resolution welcomed positive steps
taken by the Government, including in terms of
accepting humanitarian assistance, curbing forced
labour and engaging with the universal periodic review
process. The text had been drafted to foster a
consensual approach, and bilateral consultations had
been conducted throughout the process. Discussions
had also been held with the delegation of Myanmar and
the text had been revised to accommodate suggestions
accordingly. However, despite those efforts, a vote had
been requested on the draft resolution. The sponsors
would be voting in favour and strongly encouraged
other delegations to do the same.
49. Ms. Fahmy (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that human
rights issues should be approached in a
non-confrontational manner which focused on
enhancing the national capacity of States to fulfil their
human rights obligations. The United Nations human
rights framework had been refashioned to overcome
the issues that had undermined the former Commission
on Human Rights and that would allow all Member
States to accept recommendations in a spirit of
cooperation. The Heads of State and Government of
the Movement, at their 15th Summit, had emphasized
that the Human Rights Council was the principal body
responsible for consideration of human rights issues. In
that regard, it was critical to implement the universal
periodic review mechanism, which was results-oriented
and based on objective information and interactive
dialogue. They had also expressed deep concern about
the continued adoption of selective country-specific
draft resolutions in the Third Committee, which
breached the principles of universality and
non-selectivity in addressing human rights issues.
There was no need to create a parallel system to
address human rights situations, particularly one that
only targeted developing countries. The draft
resolution ran counter to the principles of international
good governance. It was a means for some States to
target others using their economic and political
capacities and alliances, confident that similar draft
resolutions could not be submitted against them. Based
on those issues, States members of the Movement
would vote against the resolution.
50. Mr. Swe (Myanmar) said that the draft resolution
was flawed both in its substance and in its approach to
procedure. The contents were based on the allegations
of insurgents and expatriate groups that opposed the
Government. Under the guise of concern for human
rights, the sponsors sought to impose political pressure
on Myanmar. Furthermore, the draft resolution
completely neglected the Government’s political and
socio-economic achievements. In the two decades
during which the European Union had been bringing
intrusive and prescriptive draft resolutions against
Myanmar before the Committee, over 100,000 armed
insurgents had joined the Government’s reconciliation
efforts, and peace and stability now prevailed
throughout most of the country.
51. National elections had been held peacefully, and
the majority of eligible voters had chosen to exercise
their democratic right to elect their representatives. The
Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) had formally welcomed the elections and
many States had acknowledged that it was a significant
step in the implementation of the seven-step road map
to democracy. The draft resolution expressed concern
about the cancellation of elections in ethnic areas and
reports of vote fraud. Yet elections had been cancelled
for security reasons in only 0.5 per cent of the
country’s constituencies. The accusations regarding
vote rigging were clear attempts by losing parties and
some media to discredit the elections, as votes had
been counted in the presence of the public and
representatives of the candidates. No formal
complaints had been received about electoral
irregularities and the election commission had
reminded the political parties that they could choose to
contest any results through official channels.A/C.3/65/SR.47
9 10-64238
52. The draft resolution was flawed in its approach to
established procedures in the United Nations. Myanmar
had supported the establishment of the Human Rights
Council and encouraged States’ engagement with the
universal periodic review process. Myanmar itself
would be undergoing review in January 2011 and had
submitted its initial report on time. Dialogue and
cooperation were the only appropriate means of
promoting and protecting human rights; finger-pointing
and pressure would not resolve differences. Should the
European Union have genuine concerns regarding
human rights, it would do better by expressing them
through cooperation rather than through attempted
coercion. Myanmar was at a critical juncture in its
transformation into a democratic State. The imposition
of political pressure and economic sanctions by both
countries and international financial institutions was
immoral. In that regard, the European Union was doing
a disservice to the cause of human rights through its
accusatory draft resolution.
53. The draft resolution infringed on Myanmar’s
sovereignty, and, if left unchallenged, would set a
dangerous precedent, as it was an obvious attempt by
Western States to interfere with the affairs of a
developing country in their disfavour. Many States
disagreed with that approach and instead supported a
policy of engagement. His delegation therefore
requested a recorded vote and appealed to all States to
stand on principle and vote against the politicized draft
resolution.
Statements made in explanation of vote before
the voting
54. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
his country had repeatedly opposed the ongoing
practice of selective and unilateral country-specific
draft resolutions being submitted to United Nations
human rights bodies for consideration. Such working
methods were counterproductive and only exacerbated
confrontation between Member States. Indeed,
politicization and a lack of genuine dialogue had
rendered the former Commission on Human Rights
ineffective.
55. The establishment of the Human Rights Council
and the successful functioning of the universal periodic
review provided new opportunities for a constructive
and mutually respectful dialogue in the area of human
rights. The consideration of human rights situations in
individual countries should therefore take place within
the framework of the Council’s review process. That
position was applicable to all country-specific draft
resolutions considered by the Committee at the current
session.
56. Lastly, in the context of the recently held
elections in Myanmar and other positive developments,
particularly the release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the
adoption of the draft resolution prepared by the
European Union would send the wrong signal to the
Myanmar authorities. His delegation would therefore
vote against the draft resolution.
57. Mr. Wang Min (China) said that his delegation
regretted that a country-specific draft resolution
against Myanmar was once again being brought before
the Committee. Constructive dialogue was the only
proper way to protect human rights, and the universal
periodic review mechanism already provided an
appropriate platform and should be fully utilized. The
recent elections in Myanmar had been conducted
peacefully and were a critical part of fulfilling the
seven-step road map to democracy. Regrettably, the
draft resolution failed to recognize that progress and
continued to employ a critical and accusatory
approach. As a neighbour to Myanmar, China
encouraged the maintenance of stability and
consolidation of the democratic process in the country.
He called on the international community to consider
the human rights situation in Myanmar objectively and
seek to strengthen dialogue and trust with the
Government. His delegation would vote against the
draft resolution.
58. Ms. Hoang Thi Than Nga (Viet Nam) said that
her delegation welcomed the general elections and the
release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi as positive steps and
hoped to see further advancements towards
reconciliation and stability in Myanmar. She regretted
that the draft resolution failed to recognize progress
and politicized human rights issues, which only served
to undermine United Nations efforts to build
cooperation and trust with the Government of
Myanmar. Her delegation was particularly concerned
with the reference to the biased and unfounded
accounts contained in the Special Rapporteur’s report.
Her delegation would vote against the draft resolution.
As a neighbour and fellow member of ASEAN, Viet
Nam urged Myanmar to cooperate with regional and
international partners. Her Government would continue
to support the good offices of the Secretary-General inA/C.3/65/SR.47
10-64238 10
the reconciliation process and stood ready to support
Myanmar in accordance with the ASEAN Charter.
59. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that her Government was committed to
the principles of non-intervention, self-determination
and the sovereignty of States. Her delegation would
vote against the draft resolution, which was a reflection
of selectivity in the promotion and protection of human
rights and ran counter to the Charter. The Human
Rights Council was the appropriate body for examining
human rights issues through constructive dialogue,
based on objective information. It was unacceptable
that some States used human rights issues to stigmatize
others, as they had no such moral authority.
60. Mr. Sorreta (Philippines) said that his delegation
did not support country-specific resolutions and would
abstain from voting. The Government of Myanmar
must stand by its people through the democratization
process. His delegation welcomed the release of Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, but other measures towards
democratization and stability must follow, including
the immediate release of prisoners of conscience. The
fact that the elections were not viewed as credible was
also of concern.
61. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) said that human rights
issues should not be exploited for political purposes
and called for a non-confrontational approach. His
delegation would vote against the draft resolution,
which selectively targeted a single country. He
encouraged all States to use the universal periodic
review process to examine human rights issues.
Myanmar needed support from all sides in the
transition process. He urged the Government of
Myanmar to implement the road map to democracy and
cooperate with the good offices of the Secretary-
General.
62. Ms. Herrera Caseiro (Cuba) said that Cuba had
had a long-standing position against country-specific
draft resolutions, which were used selectively against
developing countries. The universal periodic review
was the appropriate mechanism for considering the
human right situations in all countries on an equal
basis, based on constructive dialogue. Her delegation
was opposed to the use of human rights issues as a
means of applying political pressure and intervening in
national matters and would therefore vote against the
draft resolution.
63. Mr. Vimal (India) said that the protection of
human rights could only be achieved through dialogue
and consultation. Myanmar was an important
neighbour to India, and his Government considered
peace and stability in the country to be a crucial matter.
India would continue to support the good offices of the
Secretary-General and urged the international
community to do the same. His delegation considered
the elections to be an important step in the national
reconciliation process and welcomed the release of
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, which would no doubt foster
an inclusive approach to political reform. The draft
resolution was condemnatory and did not contribute to
the positive efforts of the United Nations. His
delegation would therefore vote against it.
64. Ms. Andamo (Thailand) said that her delegation
would abstain in the voting. The advancement of
human rights was achieved through constructive
engagement, not through country-specific resolutions.
The universal periodic review was the appropriate
means of discussing human rights issues on a
non-discriminatory basis. The holding of elections and
the release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi were important
steps in the democratization and reconciliation process,
and her delegation hoped that those developments
would lead to positive changes.
65. The political development of Myanmar must be
linked with efforts at social and economic
development. In that regard, the Government of
Thailand was committed to providing sustained
cooperation to Myanmar in the post-election period
and beyond. Thailand would also seek to fulfil its
human rights and security obligations as a member of
ASEAN. Her delegation supported the good offices of
the Secretary-General and encouraged the Government
of Myanmar to strengthen its collaboration with the
United Nations and members of ASEAN.
66. Ms. Abubakar (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said
that her delegation was concerned that some States
were imposing their political objectives under the
pretext of concern for human rights. Human rights
violations occurred in all countries. It was time for
Member States to stop submitting such draft
resolutions and leave the promotion and protection of
human rights to the Human Rights Council. In
accordance with the conclusions reached at the
summits of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
her delegation would vote against the draft resolution.A/C.3/65/SR.47
11 10-64238
However, that position should not be interpreted as
supporting any violations of human rights.
67. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.48/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium,
Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu.
Against:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Oman, Russian Federation, Somalia, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Pakistan, Philippines,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Suriname, Swaziland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Yemen,
Zambia.
68. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.48/Rev.1 was adopted
by 96 votes to 28, with 60 abstentions.2
69. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that, despite the fact
that his delegation had abstained in the voting, it
remained concerned with the continuing violations of
human rights in Myanmar, as noted in the reports of the
Special Rapporteur and the Special Adviser. He praised
the holding of elections for the first time in two
decades and hoped that the voting process would bring
the reforms needed to establish democratic institutions.
The transition to democracy should create
opportunities for all to participate in the electoral
process. While the release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
was welcome, it was unfortunate that it had taken place
after the elections. He encouraged the Government of
Myanmar to support her participation in the political
process and grant amnesty to political prisoners. His
delegation hoped that the new Government would build
on the momentum of the elections to re-engage with
the United Nations system, including by allowing visits
by the Special Adviser and the Special Rapporteur and
fulfilling the obligations assumed under the universal
periodic review process. Despite those concerns,
however, his delegation believed that country-specific
draft resolutions were the product of a deficient
process. Such resolutions were the only ones
considered by the Third Committee that did not
undergo a transparent consultation process.
Furthermore, the fact that only certain human rights
situations were addressed reinforced the view that the
treatment of human rights issues was selective and
politicized. The Human Rights Council was best
equipped to examine such matters in a holistic,
multilateral and depoliticized way.
__________________
2 The delegation of Bahrain subsequently indicated that it
had intended to abstain.A/C.3/65/SR.47
10-64238 12
70. Mr. Kodama (Japan) said that the international
community must send a message to the Government of
Myanmar that the democratization process should be
improved and had therefore voted in favour of the draft
resolution. His delegation was pleased that some of its
amendments that recognized positive steps taken by the
Government had been incorporated into the text, as
such encouragement helped to spur change. It regretted
that the elections had not been fair, but viewed the
release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi as a step forward,
and hoped to see further measures towards
democratization and reconciliation.
71. Mr. Swe (Myanmar) said that the results of the
recorded vote had demonstrated that, even in the face
of enormous political pressure, many countries would
not tolerate the exploitation of human rights through
the adoption of country-specific resolutions. His
delegation opposed the attempts to interfere with his
country’s internal affairs and domestic political
processes. The draft resolution had no moral authority
and Myanmar would not be bound by it. He thanked
the Member States who had voted against the draft
resolution or abstained in the voting. He also
recognized the constraints some developing countries
faced in taking a principled position. Although that was
regrettable, his delegation believed that in the near
future, all Member States would be free to express
their rights and vote against ill-intended resolutions.
Human rights issues in the global context must be
addressed through a dialogue-based approach guided
by the principles of respect for national sovereignty
and territorial integrity. His Government would
continue to promote and protect the human rights of
the people of Myanmar and would continue to
cooperate with the United Nations.
72. Mr. Kleib (Indonesia) said that his delegation
supported the good offices of the Secretary-General
and recognized the steps taken towards
democratization and reconciliation in Myanmar,
including the holding of elections and the release of
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. While his delegation
recognized the concerns raised in the draft resolution,
it believed that the universal periodic review was the
most appropriate mechanism to review human rights
situations in all countries on an equal, non-politicized
basis and had therefore abstained in the voting on the
draft resolution.
73. Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh) said that his delegation
welcomed the unconditional release of Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi and had taken note of the elections. He
expressed the hope that future elections would be held
in a more transparent and democratic manner. He noted
that Myanmar would be undergoing the universal
periodic review process the following year, which was
the most appropriate mechanism for addressing human
rights issues. His delegation did not believe that the
draft resolution contributed to implementing the seven-
step road map to democracy and had therefore voted
against it.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.