United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.43
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
28 January 2013
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-60482 (E)
*1260482*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 43rd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 26 November 2012, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 66: Rights of indigenous peoples (continued)
(b) Second International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)A/C.3/67/SR.43
12-60482 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of
human rights
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.49/Rev.1 and L.70)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.49/Rev.1: Situation of
human rights in Myanmar
1. The Chair drew attention to the statement of
programme budget implications of draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.49/Rev.1 contained in document
A/C.3/67/L.70.
2. Ms. Rafti (Cyprus), speaking on behalf of the
European Union and the other sponsors, said that
Iceland and Liechtenstein had joined the sponsors. The
past year had seen a transformation in Myanmar, with
great strides made towards political reform,
democratization and national reconciliation, as well as
improvements in the human rights situation. As a
result, a significant part of the draft resolution was
dedicated to recognizing the positive steps taken.
Serious challenges remained, however, and the draft
resolution called on the Government of Myanmar to
continue releasing prisoners of conscience and conduct
a comprehensive investigation to identify those still in
prison. The international community remained
concerned about continuing armed conflict in Kachin
State, the discrimination and human rights violations
affecting various ethnic minorities, especially the
Rohingya minority, and the fresh outbreaks of violence
in Rakhine State.
3. The draft resolution took into account the
substantial changes in the country and the
Government’s increasing engagement with the
international community. The European Union had
worked closely with Myanmar to produce a draft
resolution that reflected both the important strides
made over the past year and the main issues of concern
still to be addressed. Bilateral consultations had also
been held with other delegations with a view to
reaching a consensus on the draft resolution.
4. Mr. Laram (Qatar) said that his country had
joined the consensus on the draft resolution and was
encouraged by recent developments in Myanmar, but
remained deeply concerned about the situation in both
Kachin and Rakhine States. The Government of
Myanmar should strive to achieve national
reconciliation and protect minorities’ rights, especially
those of the Rohingya minority, who should be given
birth certificates and work permits. In addition, the
Government should hold the perpetrators of criminal
acts accountable, reintegrate displaced persons and
provide them with appropriate compensation and
assistance.
5. Mr. Diallo (Senegal) said that Myanmar must
redouble its efforts to combat religious discrimination,
sexual violence, torture and other human rights
violations. Cooperation between Myanmar and the
international community must be strengthened to put
an end to ethnic and religious violence and deepen the
political reform under way. The work of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar was crucial. Myanmar must do more to
protect the rights of the Rohingya community, since
that was essential to ensure national reconciliation and
democratic transition. Senegal supported the draft
resolution and expected to see in its implementation
irrefutable evidence of Myanmar’s desire to uphold the
rights of its communities.
6. Mr. Eler (Turkey) said that, notwithstanding the
positive developments in Myanmar, his country was
deeply concerned at the fresh outbreaks of violence
against the Rohingya Muslims in Rakhine State. All
parties should work together to bring an immediate end
to violence, and the Government of Myanmar should
authorize a full, transparent, independent investigation
to determine its roots and prevent its recurrence. In
addition, it should enable the Turkish Red Crescent and
other humanitarian organizations to reach persons in
need, and should create the necessary conditions for a
visit by the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
as soon as possible. Turkey stood ready to assist
Myanmar in creating a peaceful, democratic country in
which the rights of all persons were respected.
7. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.49/Rev.1 was adopted.
8. Mr. Tin (Myanmar) said that his delegation had
not requested a vote on the resolution, but stood firm in
its principled opposition to country-specific resolutions
targeting developing countries selectively. Over the
past year his Government had embarked on the path of
peaceful democratic transition, implemented a raft of
political and economic reforms, and strengthened its
cooperation with all countries.A/C.3/67/SR.43
3 12-60482
9. Myanmar welcomed the marked shift in the tone
of the resolution from confrontation and condemnation
to encouragement and cooperation, as well as the
recognition given to the various positive developments.
However, it maintained reservations to paragraphs 7,
14 and 15, which contained sensitive, misleading
language. His Government understood that it could
implement the recommendation made in paragraph 7 as
it deemed necessary in accordance with existing law.
Any human rights shortcomings would be addressed as
part of the legal reform and through mechanisms such
as the National Human Rights Commission. Myanmar
was fully aware of the remaining challenges, but would
not accept any course of action that could disrupt the
national reconciliation and reform process.
10. The Government was stepping up its efforts to
protect human rights by granting access to the
International Committee of the Red Cross for prisoner
visits, launching negotiations with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the establishment
of a country office and devising a transparent
mechanism to review remaining cases of political
prisoners by the end of 2012. Myanmar regretted the
senseless violence committed in Rakhine State, but it
was an exaggeration to refer to the clashes between the
two communities as religious persecution. Moreover,
the violent incidents occurred only in small pockets of
the country, and peoples of different faiths had resided
side by side harmoniously throughout the country’s
history. The violence could not be solved overnight,
but the Government was adopting a multi-faceted
approach that included both short and long-term
measures. The President had met with senior leaders of
various religious communities and was committed to
preventing the recurrence of violence, holding the
perpetrators accountable and meeting humanitarian
needs.
11. Myanmar accepted the resolution, including
paragraphs 14 and 15, but had a strong reservation
about the use of the term “Rohingya minority”, since
Myanmar had never had an ethnic group with that
name. The right to citizenship would never be denied
to any person who respected the law, but a distinction
must be drawn between long-time settlers and illegal
immigrants. On that understanding and in the spirit of
compromise Myanmar had not insisted on the deletion
of those two paragraphs.
12. The sponsors had shown unprecedented
flexibility in amending the last paragraph of the
resolution, and his delegation understood that from
2013, the European Union would end its decade-old
practice of tabling a draft resolution against Myanmar.
A country that was making far-reaching democratic
changes did not deserve to remain a subject of
criticism. The draft resolution adopted should therefore
be the last on the human rights situation in Myanmar,
and the need for the continuation of the Secretary-
General’s good offices mission should be re-examined.
Myanmar appreciated the work done by that mission,
but its scarce resources should be redirected towards
the economic and social development of the people of
Myanmar.
13. Ms. Cousens (United States of America) said that
Burma had made notable strides towards building a
sustainable democracy, and the resolution had set clear
benchmarks for continued progress through the
establishment of democratic institutions founded in
respect for the rule of law and human rights. Her
country welcomed the creation of a transparent,
credible process to review all remaining cases of
political prisoners, the Government’s commitment to
reach a ceasefire in Kachin State and facilitate access
for international humanitarian organizations, and its
announcement that it would become a full member of
the Open Government Partnership by 2016. However,
ongoing violence in Rakhine State was a source of
concern, and the Government should strive to build
peaceful coexistence among all communities through a
policy of integration, reconciliation and mutual respect.
Her country would continue to work with the
Government of Burma and civil society to build a
peaceful, prosperous democracy. Lastly, her country
fully supported the mandate of the Special Adviser on
Myanmar, and understood that the continuation of that
mandate would be covered by existing resources.
14. Ms. Vadiati (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
her country had joined the consensus on the text, but
maintained its principled stance against country-
specific resolutions. Iran was deeply concerned at the
grave human rights violations affecting the Muslim
Rohingya minority, and at the remarks made by some
Myanmar authorities about stripping those minorities
of their citizenship rights. Ethnic and religious
cleansing of Muslims was unjustifiable under
international law, and the United Nations must take
urgent measures to protect the fundamental rights of
Muslims in Myanmar and enable them to return to their
homeland safely. More generally, the selectiveA/C.3/67/SR.43
12-60482 4
adoption of country-specific resolutions for political
ends breached the principles of universality, objectivity
and non-selectivity, and undermined cooperation as the
essential principle to effectively promote and protect
all universally recognized human rights. The universal
periodic review was the main intergovernmental
mechanism for reviewing human rights issues at the
national level in all countries without distinction.
15. Mr. Nay (Cambodia) said that the adoption of the
resolution without a vote marked a turning point in
international cooperation, and the text was more
concise and more forward-looking than in previous
years. The time had come to look at Myanmar in a new
light; a country that had made significant strides
deserved encouragement and cooperation. The
international community should continue to support the
Government of Myanmar and its people in
implementing an historic political reform and
promoting socioeconomic development. In view of the
significant progress made, the resolution should be the
last text on the human rights situation in Myanmar.
16. Ms. Burgess (Canada) said that her country had
responded to the positive steps taken by the
Government of Myanmar by suspending its general
trade and investment sanctions, and would continue to
review its policies in response to further developments.
Canada nevertheless continued to have serious
concerns about the status of the remaining political
prisoners and ongoing violence in both Kachin and
Rakhine States. The rights of all religious and ethnic
groups must be protected, and Canada stood ready to
support the Government in its efforts to address those
issues and build a prosperous, democratic society that
respected the human rights of all its people.
17. Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) said that his country
welcomed the positive developments in Myanmar, in
particular the Government’s condemnation of the
extremist violence committed against the Muslim
Rohingya minority in Rakhine State, but urged it to
recognize them as an ethnic group. The Government
should address the political dimensions of the violence,
facilitate the return of displaced persons to their
homes, and grant them nationality. Egypt welcomed the
adoption of the resolution by consensus and hoped that
the international community and Myanmar would
continue to work together to resolve the country’s
remaining problems so that the human rights situation
in that country would not need to be addressed in
future years.
18. Mr. Chua (Singapore) said that country-specific
resolutions were highly selective and often driven by
political rather than human rights considerations, and
were inherently divisive and counterproductive.
Country-specific human rights issues should be taken
up by the Human Rights Council under the universal
periodic review mechanism. Singapore would therefore
abstain on all country-specific resolutions, but that
decision did not reflect its stance on the human rights
situation in a given country. Singapore welcomed the
progress made in Myanmar and its ongoing reform
efforts, and would continue to support the country in
its transition to democracy.
19. Mr. Kumar (India) said that his country
welcomed the economic, political and social reforms
implemented by the Government of Myanmar, and the
participation of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi as the Chair of
the parliamentary committee on the rule of law
reflected the extent of the political transition under
way. It commended the steps taken by the Government
to restore law and order and promote peace and
stability in Rakhine State, as well as its efforts to meet
the relief and rehabilitation needs of all affected
communities. The establishment of a commission to
investigate the root causes of the violence and make
recommendations was also a positive development.
The Government had demonstrated its willingness to
cooperate with the international community, and
should be provided with all possible support in a spirit
of trust and cooperation. Making the resolution the last
text on the human rights situation in Myanmar would
show the international community’s firm support for
the reform under way.
20. Mr. Hisajima (Japan) said that his country had
joined the consensus on the resolution because it
supported the overall purpose of the text and the
importance of recognition by the international
community of the positive steps that Myanmar had
taken. The international community should continue to
encourage it to take further steps forward. Japan was
closely monitoring the situation in Rakhine State, and
welcomed the President’s recent meeting with religious
leaders in both communities as well as the
establishment of the investigative commission. All
parties must work together constructively, and it was
crucial that humanitarian assistance reached the
affected communities. The approach of the
international community should be based on dialogue
and cooperation. Japan urged Myanmar to continue itsA/C.3/67/SR.43
5 12-60482
efforts to address the remaining challenges so that
Member States could reflect on the need for a
resolution on its human right situation in the future. In
the meantime, Japan would continue supporting the
Government in its efforts to further improve its human
rights situation.
21. Mr. Adnan (Indonesia) said that his country had
joined the consensus on the resolution, and welcomed
the significant progress made by the Government of
Myanmar in addressing its domestic issues, including
strengthening its cooperation with United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations to meet
the humanitarian needs of its people. Indonesia was
encouraged by the steps taken, and would continue to
support the President’s reform agenda with a view to
promoting peace, stability and development. The
Government was clearly serious and focused in its
efforts to address ethnic tensions. The international
community, including relevant United Nations
agencies, should assist in the search for long-term
solutions and in the country’s pursuit of reform,
democratization and national reconciliation.
22. Ms. Mballa Eyenga (Cameroon) said that her
country welcomed the adoption of the draft resolution
by consensus, but had always abstained on country-
specific resolutions. Dialogue and cooperation should
prevail in human rights issues, and Cameroon was
opposed to unilateral measures against countries.
Harmonious relations among States were crucial, and
country-specific resolutions did not always address the
most important aspect: the welfare of the people.
Cameroon welcomed the cooperation between the
European Union, Myanmar and the international
community, and urged all parties to assist Myanmar in
deepening the positive reforms that it had implemented
to promote peace, social justice and improved living
conditions.
23. Mr. Kommasith (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) said that his country had joined the
consensus on the resolution, but hoped that the
unprecedented developments in Myanmar would put an
end to the controversial resolution on its human rights
situation. The remaining challenges in Myanmar would
be overcome through ongoing efforts by the
Government with the support of international
community, as well as through constructive dialogue,
mutual respect, compromise and a non-confrontational
approach by all parties. In recognition of the positive
changes in Myanmar, the international community
should lift all economic sanctions to facilitate the
country’s integration, enhance its people’s enjoyment
of their economic and social rights, and strengthen
regional economic cooperation and development.
24. Ms. Hewanpola (Australia) said that her country
welcomed the historic adoption of the resolution by
consensus and applauded the remarkable gains made
by Myanmar. The people of Myanmar now had a better
chance to lead peaceful, prosperous lives than at any
time over the past 50 years, and the measure of the new
era of openness was embodied in Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi, who was now free to articulate her aspirations in
Parliament. In recognition of the important steps taken,
Australia had lifted its travel and financial sanctions,
and normalized its trade and investment relationship
with Myanmar. It had also significantly increased its
development assistance to help Myanmar achieve its
Millennium Development Goals.
25. Australia supported peacebuilding efforts,
especially in Rakhine State, where further movement
towards peace and reconciliation was particularly
pressing. It urged Member States to strengthen their
engagement with the Government of Myanmar to
ensure that the reforms took root. Myanmar had a long
road ahead, and it should remain steadfast on the
reform path by continuing to expand political
freedoms, releasing all remaining political prisoners,
promoting national reconciliation and upholding the
rights of all people. Her country hoped that the
resolution would be the last substantive text on the
human rights situation in Myanmar considered by the
Third Committee.
26. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) said that her country had
always been in favour of constructive dialogue on
human rights issues but was against the use of country-
specific resolutions to interfere in national affairs. It
nonetheless welcomed the consensus reached on the
resolution and commended the delegation of Myanmar
for its flexibility. Myanmar had made remarkable
progress in promoting national reconciliation,
accelerating economic development and improving
external relations. China hoped that Myanmar would
remain a stable neighbour, and the establishment of a
committee to investigate the situation in Rakhine State
was a positive step. However, Myanmar should be free
to determine its own internal affairs, and the situation
in that State was a domestic issue. The international
community should provide constructive support and
not resort to criticism and pressure, and should respectA/C.3/67/SR.43
12-60482 6
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as
well as the sovereign rights of Myanmar. China
vehemently opposed the use of country-specific
resolutions to impose Member States’ views on other
countries, and hoped that the resolution would be the
last on the human rights situation in Myanmar.
27. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her country was
firmly committed to the principles of non-interference,
respect for the sovereignty of States and self-
determination of peoples, and therefore rejected the
undesirable practice of individually and selectively
condemning developing countries under the pretext of
upholding human rights. Venezuela welcomed all
actions designed to facilitate negotiation and dialogue
between parties without resorting to undue pressure,
which merely created division and confrontation. The
Human Rights Council was the appropriate body for
addressing specific human rights situations on the basis
of constructive dialogue, impartiality and reliable,
objective information, and its universal periodic review
was a valuable tool created for that purpose.
28. Ms. Changtrakul (Thailand) said that her
country welcomed the dramatic transformation that had
taken place in Myanmar, and the Government’s clear
commitment to democratic reform and national
reconciliation, but the main challenge lay in ensuring
that the reforms took root. The international
community must do more than just welcome the
changes; it must send out an unequivocal message of
support to the Government and its people, refrain from
exercising unnecessary political pressure, and provide
incentives for further reform. The resolution was more
balanced, encouraging and forward-looking than in
pervious years, and that new approach should pave the
way for genuine dialogue and cooperation. Thailand
had complete faith in the Government’s commitment to
move forward in its reform process, and therefore
believed that a country-specific resolution on Myanmar
would not be necessary in 2013.
29. Mr. Al-Yafei (United Arab Emirates), speaking
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), said that most OIC member States had abstained
on previous resolutions on Myanmar and other
country-specific resolutions, but the newly established
democracy in Myanmar needed strong support from the
international community; for that reason OIC had
joined the consensus on the resolution. It encouraged
the Government to continue its efforts to end the
violence between ethnic and religious groups,
especially the organized attacks mainly targeting the
Muslim Rohingya minority. Steps should be taken to
prevent a recurrence of violence, hold the perpetrators
accountable and confront deep-rooted prejudices and
discriminatory attitudes. It was crucial to develop a
policy of integration and long-term reconciliation
between Rakhine Buddhists and the Muslim Rohingya
minority.
30. OIC was deeply concerned at Myanmar’s
reservation to paragraphs 7, 14 and 15 of the draft
resolution. Without addressing the root causes of the
conflict, in particular the entrenched resentment
towards the Rohingya minority and the violations of
their fundamental human rights, including their
citizenship rights, the democratization process could
never be complete and fully credible. The President’s
condemnation of the criminal acts and senseless
violence in Rakhine State was a step in the right
direction, and OIC hoped that the Government would
fulfil all its pledges. In the meantime, OIC would
continue to provide humanitarian assistance to the
victims of violence regardless of their religion or
ethnicity, and hoped that an office would be opened in
Myanmar to coordinate that assistance, which should
never be politicized.
31. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) said that his country
maintained its traditional principled position against
country-specific resolutions, which were used to
selectively accuse nations of the South and were a
demonstration of the application of double standards
and politicization. The resolution on Myanmar was not
designed to enhance international cooperation on
human rights issues; instead it was being used as a
political tool that contradicted the principles of
objectivity, universality and non-selectivity. Cuba was
therefore opposed to the political motivations
underpinning the resolution. The Human Rights
Council and its universal periodic review mechanism
provided the appropriate forum for considering human
rights situations in all countries on the basis of
constructive dialogue and equality.
32. Ms. Furman (Israel) said that her country
welcomed the adoption of the resolution by consensus,
as well as the positive developments in Myanmar, in
particular the release of hundreds of political prisoners
and the successful holding of by-elections. It
recognized the positive engagement of the delegationA/C.3/67/SR.43
7 12-60482
of Myanmar, and was grateful for the flexibility shown
by all delegations.
33. Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea) said that
his country welcomed the progress made by the
Government of Myanmar in promoting human rights
and establishing democracy. The resolution reflected
both the advances and the remaining concerns of the
international community in a balanced manner. His
delegation hoped that as a result of the continued
progress and reforms implemented in Myanmar, that
country would not be discussed in the General
Assembly in the future.
34. Ms. Nguyen Cam Linh (Viet Nam) said that her
country had joined the consensus on the resolution and
welcomed the positive developments in Myanmar. The
international community should continue to support the
Government of Myanmar in its efforts to promote
greater democratization. However, her country’s
consistent position had always been that constructive
dialogue, positive engagement and cooperation were
the only appropriate, effective way to address human
rights issues, and that country-specific resolutions
served only to undermine cooperation and create
confrontation.
35. Ms. Solórzano-Arriagada (Nicaragua) said that
her Government was fully committed to protecting and
promoting the human rights of all Nicaraguans without
discrimination. However, it remained opposed to the
selective, politicized practice of presenting country-
specific draft resolutions each year. Dialogue and
cooperation offered the best possible solution to any
situation without recourse to foreign intervention or
external pressure. Nicaragua noted the positive
developments in Myanmar, but stood firm in its belief
that the Human Rights Council was the ideal forum for
examining human rights situations at the national level.
The universal periodic review had been established for
that very reason, and provided the opportunity for
discussion on the basis of impartiality, objectivity, non-
selectivity and non-discrimination. It also ensured
greater consistency in the promotion and protection of
human rights by allowing constructive dialogue on
situations in all countries in equal conditions.
36. Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) said that the Human Rights Council was the
relevant forum for examining human rights situations
in countries in equal conditions. The consideration of
country-specific resolutions within the Third
Committee entailed selectivity and politicization, and
his country remained opposed to that practice.
37. Mr. Fiallo (Ecuador) said that his country had
joined the consensus on the resolution but remained
opposed to the use of country-specific resolutions to
deal with human rights situations. The Human Rights
Council was the competent body for considering such
situations, and the universal periodic review was the
appropriate mechanism, since it was free from
politicization and double standards. Ecuador’s long-
standing rejection of country-specific resolutions was
without prejudice to its views on the human rights
situations in the countries covered by such resolutions.
Cooperation and constructive dialogue were the most
effective means of improving the human rights
situation worldwide.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.32/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.32/Rev.1: Human rights
and extreme poverty
38. Mr. Thornberry (Peru), introducing the draft
resolution, said that it noted the adoption of Human
Rights Council resolution 21/11, which contained the
guiding principles on extreme poverty and human
rights.
39. Finland, New Zealand, Norway, the Republic of
Korea and Turkey had joined the sponsors.
40. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Austria, Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, France,
Haiti, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Namibia, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Portugal, San Marino, the Republic of Moldova,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had
joined the sponsors.A/C.3/67/SR.43
12-60482 8
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.40: Protection of migrants
41. Ms. Diaz Gras (Mexico), introducing the draft
resolution, said that the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Ecuador, El Salvador, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Turkey
and Uruguay had joined the sponsors. The draft
recalled that the human rights enshrined in the major
international human rights instruments should not be
affected by the migration status of individuals and
should be upheld at all times. States should protect the
rights of migrants in their territories. The draft
resolution also underscored the obligation of States to
protect women migrants from violence and
exploitation.
42. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Burkina
Faso, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia,
Haiti, Honduras, Kyrgyzstan, Mali, Mauritius,
Morocco, Nicaragua, Paraguay, the Philippines,
Senegal, Somalia, South Sudan, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Uganda and Uruguay had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.47: Combating intolerance,
negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination,
incitement to violence and violence against persons,
based on religion or belief
43. Mr. Al-Yafei (United Arab Emirates) introducing
the draft resolution on behalf of the member States of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, said that it
reflected recent loss of life and violence and
discrimination against Muslims triggered by the
horrible video that had deliberately denigrated the
prophet Mohammed. Governments should safeguard
not only freedom of speech but also the right to
freedom of belief without insolent provocation.
Selective application of the right to freedom of belief
under the pretext of free speech contributed to
disharmony.
44. Human Rights Council resolution 16/18 and
General Assembly resolution 66/167 represented the
common understanding of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation on the sensitive issue of intolerance based
on religion. Consensus on the matter, which had been
achieved with difficulty, would be maintained.
45. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that the Dominican Republic had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
A/C.3/67/L.21/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.21/Rev.1: Intensifying
global efforts for the elimination of female genital
mutilation
46. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
47. Mr. Kogda (Burkina Faso), introducing the draft
resolution, said that the African Group was gratified by
the inclusion of female genital mutilation in the agenda
of the General Assembly. The draft resolution was the
first one on the issue.
48. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Austria, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Dominican
Republic, Georgia, Grenada, Haiti, Jordan, Lebanon,
Montenegro, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, the
Philippines, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine and
Uruguay had joined the sponsors.
49. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L21/Rev.1 was adopted.
50. Reverend Wylie (Observer for the Holy See) said
that while the draft resolution contained important
elements, his delegation wished to reaffirm its
established reservations with regard to the expressions
“sexual and reproductive health” and “gender,” as set
out in the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development and the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. The term
“sexual and reproductive health” was not to be taken to
include access to abortion and abortifacients. “Gender”
meant “male” and “female” according to the general
and historic usage of the term.
51. Ms. Rafti (Cyprus), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, the acceding country Croatia, the
candidate countries Iceland, Montenegro, Serbia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
stabilization and association process countries Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and, in addition, Armenia
and Liechtenstein, said that adoption of the draft
resolution was a historic step in the global effort to end
female genital mutilation.
52. Mr. Ragaglini (Italy) said that the draft
resolution was not an end in itself, but rather an
instrument to achieve the shared goal of freeing girlsA/C.3/67/SR.43
9 12-60482
worldwide from female genital mutilation. His country
was a major supporter of programmes to end the
practice.
53. Mr. Mosot (Kenya) said that adoption of the draft
resolution would provide a global framework for
dealing with the heinous practice of female genital
mutilation. It was not the time to point fingers or
apportion blame. In addition to the human rights
aspect, female genital mutilation had social, cultural
economic, community and personal dimensions, thus
the difficulty in putting an end to it.
54. A recent law in Kenya made it illegal to practice
or procure female genital mutilation and even banned
derogatory remarks regarding women who had not
undergone the practice.
Agenda item 66: Rights of indigenous peoples
(continued)
(b) Second International Decade of the World’s
Indigenous People (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.24/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.24/Rev.1: Rights of
indigenous peoples
55. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
56. Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) introduced the draft resolution.
57. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee), said
that Greece, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay and
Slovenia had joined the sponsors.
58. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.24/Rev.1 was adopted.
59. Mr. Dean (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland) said that, like all other individuals,
indigenous people were entitled to the full protection
of their human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Human rights were universal and applied equally to all.
Certain groups in society should not benefit from rights
not available to others. The United Kingdom did not
accept the principle of collective human rights. It was
important to ensure that individuals within groups were
not left vulnerable and unprotected by allowing the
rights of the group to supersede the human rights of the
individual. That position was without prejudice to the
fact that the Governments of many States with
indigenous populations had granted them collective
rights in their national legislation, thereby
strengthening the economic and political positions of
indigenous peoples in those States. The United
Kingdom therefore understood any internationally
agreed references to the rights of indigenous peoples to
refer to those rights bestowed upon indigenous peoples
at the national level.
60. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that
many indigenous peoples and communities were
indeed vulnerable to the effects of climate change.
However, the United States disagreed with the
implication of the outcome of the Peoples’ World
Conference on Climate Change and the Rights of
Mother Earth, referenced in the draft resolution, that
the solution was to assign blame to a particular group
of countries.
61. Mr. Dempsey (Canada) said that the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples reflected the aspirations of the international
community and was not legally binding. It did not
reflect customary international law, nor did it change
Canadian laws.
62. The Chair, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 55/488, suggested that the Committee should
take note of the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
rights of indigenous peoples (A/67/301).
63. It was so decided.
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.55/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.55/Rev.1: Glorification
of Nazism: inadmissibility of certain practices that
contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance
64. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
65. Mr. Nebenzi (Russian Federation) said that the
draft resolution was a tribute to the memory of those
who had perished in the struggle against the Nazis, and
the request for a recorded vote was an attempt to deny
history. In certain countries, monuments to Nazis wereA/C.3/67/SR.43
12-60482 10
being erected with increasing frequency. More and
more often, anniversaries of the liberation from
Nazism were being declared days of mourning; people
who honoured opponents of Nazism found themselves
placed under arrest; and Nazi collaborators were
glorified.
66. Certain delegations had for some years promoted
the idea that racist ideas should not be addressed
through prohibitions or criminal prosecution, and that
in healthy democracies, society itself would reject
racist ideas. However, that explained neither the
actions of Anders Breivik, whose freedom of
expression had resulted in dozens of innocent
casualties in Norway, nor the recent shooting in a Sikh
temple in the United States.
67. The sponsors had negotiated some editorial
changes paragraph 16 of the draft resolution.
68. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Angola, Iraq, Nigeria and the United Republic of
Tanzania had joined the sponsors.
69. Ms. Belskaya (Belarus), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that one quarter of her
country’s citizens had perished and 619 of its villages
had been burned in the fight against Nazism. However,
traces of the ideology remained. Extremist political
parties and movements openly cultivated Nazi ideas of
hatred, ethnic exceptionalism and superiority. A
number of States used the pretext of freedom of speech
to ignore the lessons of World War II, looked the other
way at the glorification of Nazism and enabled the
resurrection of fascist ideology.
70. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that the
draft resolution failed to distinguish between offensive
expression, which should be protected, and actions,
such as discrimination and violence motivated by bias,
which should always be prohibited. Individual freedom
of expression and association should be robustly
protected, even when ideas were offensive. States were
urged to refrain from invoking article 4 of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and article 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to limit freedom
of expression or as an excuse for failing to take
effective measures. In a free society, hateful ideas
would fail. The best antidote was proactive government
outreach to minority religious groups and vigorous
defence of both freedom of religion and freedom of
expression, not criminalization of hate speech.
71. At the request of the delegation of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.55/Rev.1.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Canada, Marshall Islands, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Mali, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique,A/C.3/67/SR.43
11 12-60482
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
72. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.55/Rev.1 was adopted
by 120 votes to 3, with 57 abstentions.
73. Ms. Desai (Timor-Leste) and Ms. Polo (Togo)
said that their votes in favour of the draft resolution
had not been registered due to a voting machine
malfunction.
74. Ms. Loew (Switzerland) said that the draft
resolution targeted only certain contemporary forms of
racism. However, all forms of racism were
unacceptable. The draft resolution should be
incorporated into the omnibus draft resolution on
racism sponsored by the Group of 77 and China, which
also addressed contemporary forms of racism.
75. Mr. Hjelde (Norway) said that intolerance must
be confronted through dialogue and open debate rather
than by restricting the rights to freedom of expression
and assembly. The narrow scope and insufficient
human rights perspective of the draft resolution
remained worrisome. The approaches in the draft
resolution to freedom of speech and expression and to
the independence of the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance were regrettable.
The biased focus on particular issues not relevant to
the human rights agenda did not serve to advance the
common struggle against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. A more
comprehensive, objective and legally appropriate
approach should have been adopted.
76. Ms. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that a significant number
of concerns had been met in the text. Some of the most
controversial language introduced into the draft
resolution in 2011 had been removed, such as the
paragraph on civil society. The current draft resolution
was fully in line with article 4 of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination. Although the language could be further
refined, the current draft resolution more accurately
reflected the judgment of the Nuremberg Tribunal. The
reference to the role of the Internet in combating
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance was more balanced than in previous years.
77. The unexpected change in the title of the draft
resolution narrowed its scope, however. The
fundamental rights to freedom of expression and
assembly were addressed too restrictively. The ways in
which the issues of monuments, memorials and
national liberation movements were addressed was
incorrect with regard to human rights. The prescriptive
and detailed requests put to the Special Rapporteur
placed his independence at risk and unduly restricted a
comprehensive reporting exercise.
78. Ms. Vaz Patto (Portugal) said that her delegation
appreciated the more precise references to the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination. Concerns remained
regarding safeguarding freedom of expression and the
inclusion of matters unrelated to the human rights
agenda and racism.
79. Ms. Vek (Argentina) said that paragraph 23 of the
draft resolution should under no circumstances be
understood as restricting freedom of expression.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.