United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.44
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
12 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-63270 (E)
*1063270*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 44th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 11 November 2010, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 63: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 67: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/65/SR.44
10-63270 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 63: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.59: Proclamation of
24 March as the International Day for the Right to
Truth concerning Gross Human Rights Violations and
for the Dignity of Victims
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. García González (El Salvador) said that
Brazil, Costa Rica, Mexico, Paraguay, Spain and
Uruguay had joined the list of sponsors.
3. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Armenia, Azerbaijan, Germany, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania and the Seychelles had also become
sponsors.1
4. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.59 was adopted.
5. Ms. Phipps (United States of America) said that
respect for the right to truth would advance the rule of
law, transparency, honesty, accountability, justice and
good governance, all of which were key components of
a democratic society. Her Government strongly
supported those principles through truth commissions,
forensic research and programmes to encourage
dialogue.
6. The right to truth was closely linked to the right
to seek, receive, and impart information guaranteed
under article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. It might be variously defined as
the right to be informed, freedom of information, or the
right to know.
7. The United States continued to acknowledge, as it
had done at the Conference on the Missing convened
by International Committee of the Red Cross in 2003,
that a right to know was referred to in article 32 of the
first Protocol additional to the Geneva Conventions
(1977). Her country was not a party to that instrument
and had no obligations under it, but supported the
principle that families had a right to know of the fate of
their missing family members.
Agenda item 67: Right of peoples to self-determination
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.51: Universal realization of
the right of peoples to self-determination
8. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
9. Mr. Sial (Pakistan) said that Burkina Faso,
Ghana, Honduras, Ghana and Sierra Leone had become
sponsors. The right to self-determination was a
cornerstone of the Charter of the United Nations, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights. It had been emphasized by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and other relevant
organizations.
10. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the sponsors had been joined by Ecuador, Jamaica,
the Maldives, Mali, Namibia, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Zambia.
11. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.51 was adopted.
12. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union in explanation of position after the
adoption of the draft resolution, said that the right of
peoples to self-determination was a fundamental
principle of international law, and was enshrined
notably in common article I of the Geneva Conventions
and Article I of the Charter of the United Nations. The
right to self-determination was closely associated with
respect for all human rights, democracy and the rule of
law, including the principle of equality between
citizens. It required free, fair and regular elections in
the context of a democratic society, and full respect of
all civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights
and fundamental freedoms.
13. The scope of the draft resolution was therefore
too narrow. The European Union would have preferred
a clearer focus on the practice of self-determination
under international law. Moreover, the text contained a
number of inaccuracies. The right to self-determination
applied only to peoples, rather than to nations.
Although associated with respect for all human rights,
it was not a precondition for their enjoyment. A
reference to the right of return as established in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights would also
have been welcome. 1
The delegation of India subsequently informed the
Committee that it had intended to join the sponsors.A/C.3/65/SR.44
3 10-63270
14. Ms. Phipps (United States of America) said that
her country had joined the consensus in view of the
importance of the right to self-determination. However,
she wished to note that the resolution contained many
misstatements of international law, and included
provisions that were inconsistent with current practice.
15. Ms. Robles (Spain) said that, as the General
Assembly had affirmed on numerous occasions, self-
determination was not the only principle relevant to the
decolonization of Non-Self-Governing Territories. In
certain cases, the principle of territorial integrity was
applicable. One such case was that of Gibraltar, which
was the subject of a consensus resolution adopted by
the Fourth Committee at the current session. The
original population of that colony had been forced to
abandon the territory. The current inhabitants were
descended from the settlers, and the fact that three
centuries had passed did not alter that fact. The right to
self-determination could not apply to the colonizing
people to the detriment of the colonized people.
16. Spain was willing to work towards a permanent
settlement in accordance with the terms established by
the General Assembly. Any such settlement must be
reached within the context of talks with the United
Kingdom, taking into account the interests and
aspirations of the people of Gibraltar.
17. Ms. Freedman (United Kingdom), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, said that her country’s
position on the issue of the sovereignty of Gibraltar
was well known and had been reiterated before the
Fourth Committee on 6 October 2010 (A/C.4/65/SR.4).
The United Kingdom had no doubt about its
sovereignty over Gibraltar and the territorial waters
surrounding it. It did not accept that the principle of
territorial integrity had ever been applicable to the
decolonization of Gibraltar. Nor did the existence of a
sovereignty dispute imply that the people of Gibraltar
did not have the right of self-determination. The United
Kingdom remained committed to the trilateral process
of dialogue on Gibraltar among the Governments of the
United Kingdom, Spain and Gibraltar.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.25/Rev.1: Committee
against Torture
18. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting an oral statement of programme budget
implications, drew attention to the terms of paragraphs
2 and 3 of the draft resolution. In accordance with rule
25 of its rules of procedure, the Committee against
Torture had, in an oral statement of programme budget
implications at its 44th session, been informed of the
requirements relating to additional meeting time in
2011 and 2012.
19. Current provisions in the programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011 provided for travel and per
diem costs for the ten members of the Committee to
attend its two annual regular sessions in Geneva,
consisting of three weeks or 15 working days each, as
well as for conference services for those meetings.
20. At its forty-first session held in November 2008,
the Committee against Torture had requested the
General Assembly to authorize it to meet for an
additional session of four weeks each in February 2010
and in February 2011. The Committee had been
informed that the recommendation would give rise to
additional requirements of $2,105,300 per year or
$4,210,600 for the biennium under section 2 of the
programme budget. That amount would include the
provision of conference services, including summary
records and interpretation in the official languages, for
a total of 80 additional sessional meetings during the
biennium 2010-2011, as well as an estimated additional
2,880 pages of pre-session and in-session
documentation and 220 pages of post-session
documentation in the official languages. For
conference support services, it was estimated that
additional requirements of $30,600 would be required
under section 28 E. Provisions had been made for all of
the additional conference servicing requirements in the
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011.A/C.3/65/SR.44
10-63270 4
21. The terms of paragraph 2 of the draft resolution
entailed a revision to those earlier estimates. The
additional meetings of the Committee would require
conference-servicing resources in the amount of
$1,189,900 for a total of 20 additional sessional
meetings in 2011 and 20 in 2012. That amount
included summary records, interpretation in the official
languages, and an estimated additional 960 pages of
pre-session and in-session documentation and 160
pages of post-session documentation in the official
languages for each year. The estimate for conference
support services had also been revised to only $15,800
under section 28 E, or $7,900 for each year.
22. Because additional resources for conference
services had been provided in the programme budget
for the biennium 2010-2011, the existing resources
were deemed sufficient to cover the resource
requirements for 2011. The resources required under
section 28 E were also considered sufficient for that
year. The resource requirements to service an
additional week of sessional meetings in May and
November 2012 would be considered in the context of
the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2012-2013.
23. It was also anticipated that the following
additional resources would be required under section
23 of the programme budget for the biennium 2011-
2012: (i) daily subsistence allowance costs for the
members of the Committee in relation to the additional
meetings, estimated at $34,700 per session or $69,400
each in 2011 and 2012; and (ii) staff support at the P-2
level for 12 work months each, estimated at $146,200
each in 2011 and in 2012. The requirements for the
year 2011 would be met within the resources approved
under section 23. The additional resource requirements
to service the one additional week of sessional
meetings in May and in November 2012 would be
considered in the context of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2012-2013.
24. With respect to paragraph 3, it was estimated that
the preparation of the report to be submitted to the
sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly, including
translation and reproduction requirements, would
amount to $24,000. The additional amount would be
met within available resources approved under Section
2 of the programme budget for the biennium 2011-
2012.
25. Should the General Assembly adopt the draft
resolution, the estimated requirements would be met
within the provision approved for the biennium 2010-
2011. The total requirements of $1,413,400 for the
biennium 2012-2013 would be dealt with in the context
of the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2012-2013.
26. With regard to the sixth preambular paragraph of
the draft resolution, attention was drawn to General
Assembly resolution 45/248 B, section VI, and
subsequent resolutions, the most recent of which was
resolution 64/243, in which the General Assembly had
reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee was the
appropriate Main Committee of the Assembly entrusted
with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary
matters, and reaffirmed the role of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
27. Ms. Kofoed (Denmark) said that Belgium,
Canada, Madagascar, the Republic of Korea and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the
sponsors.
28. The phrase “in order to address the backlogs of
reports of States parties and individual complaints
awaiting consideration” should be added at the end of
paragraph 2. In paragraph 3, the words “and tailored”
should be inserted between the words “concrete” and
“proposals”. The phrase “including the Committee
against Torture,” should be added between the phrase
“human rights treaty bodies,” and the phrase “building
on the work”. The word “costs” should be replaced
with “resource requirements”. The phrase “and
programmes of work” should be deleted.
29. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following delegations had also become
sponsors: Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bulgaria, Ecuador, Germany, Ireland, Latvia,
Lithuania, Mali, Peru, Portugal, the Republic of
Moldova, Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and Ukraine.
30. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.25/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.27: The role of the
Ombudsman, mediator and other national human rights
institutions in the promotion and protection of human
rightsA/C.3/65/SR.44
5 10-63270
31. Mr. El Mkhantar (Morocco) said that the
resolution would strengthen the role of the ombudsman
and relations between mediating institutions. The
sponsors had been joined by Argentina, Australia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, the Comoros,
Eritrea, Gabon, Georgia, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Japan, Lebanon, Mongolia, the Seychelles, Turkey, the
United States of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
32. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following States had also become sponsors:
Belize, Burkina Faso, Colombia, the Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Indonesia, Iraq, Niger, Norway, Panama,
Saint Lucia, Togo and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.
33. The French version of the text incorrectly used
the term “droits de l’homme” for human rights; the
Secretariat would make the appropriate change.
34. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.27 was adopted.
The meeting was suspended at 11:10 a.m. and resumed
at 12.20 p.m.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.36/Rev.1: Human rights
and extreme poverty
35. Mr. Pérez (Peru) said that an ample, inclusive
and transparent process had made it possible to agree
on a balanced text that took into consideration the
concerns of all Member States. The sponsors had been
joined by Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia,
Germany, Israel, Liechtenstein, the Philippines, the
Republic of Korea and Sweden.
36. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following States had become sponsors: Burkina
Faso, the Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Lithuania, Madagascar, Malta, Morocco,
Namibia, Niger, the Seychelles, Sudan, Suriname,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda and Ukraine.
37. Mr. Chipaziwa (Zimbabwe), speaking in
explanation of position, said that his country felt
compelled to withdraw its sponsorship of the draft
resolution, which sought to redefine by stealth the
levels of development of countries. Contrary to what
was stated in the seventh preambular paragraph, it was
patently untrue that poverty persisted in all countries of
the world. Paragraph 7 sought to redefine Millennium
Development Goal 1, which referred to extreme
poverty rather than to poverty. The two terms could not
be used interchangeably, as was the case in the draft
resolution. Moreover, the gravity and characteristics of
extreme poverty differed from one country to another.
38. The Monterrey Consensus of the International
Conference on Financing for Development stated
clearly who should shoulder the burden of
development. However, his delegation felt that the
draft resolution undermined the established
categorization of development levels. Such draft
resolutions tended increasingly to erode internationally
agreed development strategies and the share of the
burden to be borne by each category of country.
39. While not blocking consensus, Zimbabwe would
continue to work with like-minded delegations in order
to prevent any further erosion of the common
understanding of internationally agreed development
goals.
40. Mr. Ndimeni (South Africa), speaking in
explanation of position, said that the question of
extreme poverty and hunger was a priority for his
country. It continued to cause deep concern for
developing countries, in particular in sub-Saharan
Africa. The practical enjoyment of human rights and
development were inextricably linked and mutually
reinforcing, and were underpinned by the principle of
non-discrimination. The sponsors of the resolution had,
year after year, adopted an approach that purported to
justify the existence of extreme poverty in regions with
mega-economies and mega-resources. The draft
resolution in its current wording contained a fallacy, in
that it sought to equate all countries of the world in
terms of their economic strength and levels of social
and economic development.
41. The realization of the right to development
remained central to the issue at hand. Efforts to
eradicate extreme poverty and hunger should not be a
mere academic exercise, and should not trivialize the
issue. Instead, they should seek to involve their
intended beneficiaries.
42. The report of the independent expert on the
question of human rights and extreme poverty
(A/65/259) had made it very clear that States had not
only a responsibility, but also a legally binding
obligation to eradicate extreme poverty. She had also
underlined that the issue must not be politicized. Such
views were consistent with the principled position of
South Africa.A/C.3/65/SR.44
10-63270 6
43. The draft resolution omitted fundamental
principles that ought to underpin efforts to eradicate
extreme poverty and hunger, in particular the principle
of non-discrimination, which had been stressed in the
report. Moreover, the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action and Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action had highlighted that poverty,
underdevelopment, marginalization, social exclusion
and economic disparities impeded the achievement of
social cohesion within States and were an affront to
human dignity.
44. The vision contained in the current text was
politically untenable for all developing countries,
particularly the victims of extreme poverty and hunger.
The views of those living in conditions of extreme
poverty and hunger must be taken into consideration.
They should contribute in an open, transparent and
inclusive manner to the development of comprehensive
solutions in order to address the various manifestations
and root causes of extreme poverty and hunger, as well
as poverty and underdevelopment in all regions of the
world.
45. While not blocking consensus on the draft
resolution, his delegation would remain fully engaged
with that issue in the future.
46. Ms. Phipps (United States of America) said that
the United States of America was the world’s largest
provider of official development assistance, and was a
leading source of financing for development, foreign
direct investment, trade remittances and private
donations. At the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals, it had announced a new Global Development
Policy, which would place a premium on broad-based
economic growth and game-changing innovations.
47. Her delegation would join the consensus on the
draft resolution on the explicit understanding that there
was no implication that States must become parties to
instruments to which they were not parties, or
implement human rights obligations contained in such
instruments. The draft resolution did not constitute a
change in treaty law or customary international law.
The reaffirmation of prior instruments applied only to
those Member States which were parties to them.
48. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.36/Rev.1 was adopted.
49. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) said that he
wished to recognize the efforts of Peru in conducting
open consultations. All delegations had been kept up to
date, and various concerns had been taken into account.
In view of the importance of the topic, he was pleased
that the draft resolution had been adopted by
consensus.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.