United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.21
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
7 January 2013
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-56502 (E)
*1256505*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 21st meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 23 October 2012, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
later: Ms. Alfeine (Vice-Chair). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Comoros)
Contents
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 103: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)A/C.3/67/SR.21
12-56502 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.20 and L.22)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.20: Trafficking in women
and girls
1. Ms. Hernando (Philippines), introducing the
draft resolution, said that the biennial resolution had
been updated to reflect emerging concerns related to
human trafficking and placed the emphasis on the
contributing factors that made people vulnerable to
trafficking in persons, the need to strengthen the
enforcement of labour laws that required business
enterprises to respect human rights, in particular to
prevent and combat human trafficking in supply
chains, and the need to devise, enforce and strengthen
systems and mechanisms to expedite disposition of
cases of trafficking in persons. In addition, the business
sector was invited to adopt ethical codes of conduct in
order to ensure decent work and prevent any form of
exploitative practices that fostered trafficking.
Trafficking in persons was a crime of such magnitude
that it could not be dealt with successfully at the
national or even regional level alone. Member States
therefore had a shared responsibility to work together
to end that growing global scourge, protect innocent
victims and prosecute perpetrators.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.22: Supporting efforts to
end obstetric fistula
2. Ms. Sarr (Senegal), introducing the draft
resolution, said that almost 800 women died from
pregnancy complications every day; for every woman
who died more than 20 were injured or disabled. One
of the most serious injuries was obstetric fistula;
between 2 and 3.5 million women and girls were
currently living with obstetric fistula, mainly in
developing countries, since it had been virtually
eliminated in the industrialized nations. The victims
were typically poor, uneducated women living in rural,
remote areas with limited or no access to health-care
facilities. However, obstetric fistula was preventable
and in most cases treatable and its persistence reflected
both health system constraints and socioeconomic and
gender inequalities. With a view to achieving
Millennium Development Goal five by 2015, the
international community must accelerate efforts to
ensure equitable access to affordable, comprehensive,
high-quality maternal health care that included skilled
attendance during childbirth and emergency obstetric
care in the event of complications. The draft resolution
therefore called for renewed focus through specific
programmes and additional resources in order to save
women’s lives.
Agenda item 103: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.18: Preventing and
combating corrupt practices and transfer of assets of
illicit origin and returning such assets, in particular to
the countries of origin, in accordance with the United
Nations Convention against Corruption
3. Mr. Osorio (Colombia), introducing the draft
resolution, said that corruption had a negative impact
on living conditions and on the legitimacy of
institutions and their proper functioning. In the draft
resolution, Member States were urged to continue
focusing on the recovery of assets arising from
corruption and the return of such assets to their
legitimate owners in accordance with the provisions of
chapter five of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption. Despite the significant progress made, only
2 per cent of the funds of illicit origin from developing
countries had been returned to the countries of origin,
largely because countries encountered technical and
legal difficulties in detecting transfers of the proceeds
of crime and corruption. Capacity-building measures
were therefore required so that States parties were able
to issue and respond to requests for assistance,
especially given that corruption and the transfer and
non-repatriation of funds arising from corruption had a
negative impact on countries’ development.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/67/387-S/2012/717 and A/67/390)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/67/40 (Vols. I and II), 44, 48,
48/Corr.1, 222, 264, 269, 279 and 281)
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action (continued) (A/67/36)
4. Mr. Pillay (Chair, Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights) said that the opportunity to
address the Third Committee represented the first time
the Committee on Economic, Social and CulturalA/C.3/67/SR.21
3 12-56502
Rights had reported to the General Assembly, and to
him, it represented the recognition that the Committee
was a core component of the treaty body system. He
also welcomed the recent decision taken by the
Economic and Social Council to grant it additional
meeting time. The Committee had recently reduced the
number of meetings allocated to consideration of
periodic reports from three to two on a provisional
basis. However, it attached great importance to its
constructive dialogue with representatives of States
parties and would do its utmost to ensure that the more
limited time available for such dialogue did not have a
negative impact on the quality of the discussions and
their outcome. To that end, it continuously strived to
enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of its working
methods.
5. The Committee had noted with concern the effect
of the global economic and financial crisis on the
enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. In
May 2012, a letter had been sent to States parties
recalling their obligations to protect those rights, even
amid widening public deficits and poor economic
growth. Backward steps in respect for economic, social
and cultural rights constituted a disincentive to growth
and could lead to social insecurity and political
instability with a disproportionate impact on women,
children and disadvantaged and marginalized groups.
Policies to tackle the economic downturn should be in
line with States parties’ obligations to respect, protect
and promote economic, social and cultural rights,
which constituted the foundation for achieving the key
development goals beyond 2015 in such areas as
discrimination, inequalities, education, health care,
social protection and macroeconomic stability.
6. The Committee urged Member States to consider
ratifying the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
which required only two more ratifications to enter into
force. On the subject of treaty body strengthening, the
two additional weeks of meeting time would enable the
Committee to reduce the backlog of reports. However,
it was hoped that a long-term sustainable solution
would be found at its forthcoming session in November
2012.
7. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) said that China
welcomed the strengthening of the Committee’s role in
promoting the development of economic, social and
cultural rights in all countries and it therefore
supported the increase in its meeting time. Economic,
social and cultural rights and civil and political rights
constituted two equally important categories of basic
human rights. Member States should ensure that those
basic rights were protected even in times of economic
and financial crisis and the international community
should pay more attention to rectifying the imbalances
between developed and developing countries. As the
world’s largest developing country, China attached
great importance to economic, social and cultural
rights, especially the right of survival and the right to
development. Since ratifying the Covenant in 2001,
China had faithfully fulfilled its obligations and
continued to strive to realize those rights. It therefore
looked forward to ongoing constructive dialogue with
the Committee.
8. Mr. Geurts (Observer for the European Union),
commending the Committee for its indispensable work
in promoting observance of the rights enshrined in the
Covenant, asked for further information on the draft
rules of procedure for the Optional Protocol, including
the possible use of admissibility criteria for future
complaints. Information would also be appreciated on
the work of the Committee specifically relating to the
economic, social and cultural rights of women. Lastly,
education was a key objective of European Union
development cooperation and his delegation would
therefore welcome guidance on how to ensure better
access to quality education for vulnerable groups and
people facing multiple forms of discrimination, both
now and after 2015.
9. Mr. Pillay (Chair, Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights) said that he hoped that
China would consider ratifying the Optional Protocol
as its next step forward. The rules of procedure for the
Optional Protocol would be adopted in November 2012
and were standard provisions similar to those of the
optional protocols of other committees. The clear
disadvantage provision contained in article 4 was
peculiar to the Optional Protocol for that Covenant but
the Committee would apply the provision on a
discretionary basis and only if it were to be
overwhelmed with applications, which was unlikely.
10. The Committee was continuously striving to
promote women’s rights, since women were more
likely to suffer from poverty and encounter obstacles in
their access to credit facilities and employment. In its
constructive dialogue with States parties, the
Committee always emphasized that women formed part
of disadvantaged, marginalized and vulnerable groups.A/C.3/67/SR.21
12-56502 4
Access to education for all women and men was
important but access to health care, sanitation and
clean water were equally vital. The Committee was
keen to ensure that those issues continued to be viewed
as rights and that associated targets were set in the
post-2015 agenda. The Committee was considering
drafting a statement to give guidance to the delegation
of high-level experts on that matter and to stress that
the right to development in particular constituted a
right like all others.
11. Ms. Majodina (Chair, Human Rights
Committee), introducing the sixty-seventh annual
report of the Human Rights Committee (A/67/40, Vols.
I and II), said that since 1977 the Committee had been
monitoring the implementation by States parties of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and its two Optional Protocols and guiding States
parties on the fulfilment of their human rights
obligations. To date, it had registered around 2,199
complaints and examined over 934 cases, and its
recommendations had led to commutations of the death
penalty, early release from prison, legislative and
policy changes and other important reforms. The
Committee valued the participation of all partners in
drafting its general comments and planned to give
further guidance to States parties on how they could
contribute to that process. Recent general comments
included general comment No. 34 on article 19 of the
Covenant, which had provided the most authoritative
commentary on the rights to freedom of opinion and
expression; the Committee was in the process of
preparing a general comment on article 9 on the right
to liberty and security of the person. The Committee
urged those Member States which were not yet party to
the Covenant and its Optional Protocols to consider
ratifying them as soon as possible.
12. Despite its achievements to date, the Committee
faced many challenges. For example, 55 States parties
were currently at least five years overdue in submitting
either an initial or a periodic report. Country reports
provided a solid basis for the constructive dialogue
between the Committee and States parties; the
Committee therefore urged all States parties to submit
their reports on time, especially initial reports, so that
the Committee would not have to consider their
implementation of the Covenant in the absence of a
report. Another challenge was understaffing, which had
resulted in a considerable backlog of individual
communications; the Committee had therefore
requested additional temporary resources to enable it to
deal with the 380 communications registered and 160
awaiting decision.
13. As a cost-cutting measure the Committee had
established a new voluntary simplified reporting
procedure for the examination of reports, which
involved the adoption of lists of issues prior to
reporting. The aim was to reduce the burden on States
parties, the Committee and the Secretariat by
introducing more targeted reports for the benefit of all.
Lastly, the Committee welcomed the treaty body
strengthening process under way and hoped that those
bodies would be provided with sufficient, sustained
resources.
14. Ms. Hosking (South Africa) said that the scope
and breadth of the activities included in the report of
the Human Rights Committee reflected its valuable
work and significant contribution to the extensive body
of international jurisprudence on civil and political
rights. The Committee had played a pivotal role for
many years in promoting and monitoring
implementation of the Covenant and its two Optional
Protocols. However, South Africa recognized the
challenges it faced in relation to the high proportion of
overdue reports, which complicated its efforts to
ensure equal and fair treatment consistent with its
mandate, as well as the budgetary and human resources
constraints mentioned in its report. South Africa was
therefore fully committed to working with Member
States to strengthen and enhance the effective
functioning of the United Nations human rights treaty
body system by finding sustainable solutions to those
and related challenges facing the international human
rights machinery.
15. Mr. Geurts (Observer for the European Union)
said that the European Union was firmly committed to
establishing effective, independent human rights treaty
bodies. Such bodies played a key role in ensuring
international protection and promotion of human
rights. The European Union welcomed the option of
the list of issues prior to reporting and sought further
information about the benefits of that process as well
as any advice the Committee might give to other
committees that were considering introducing a similar
process. The simplified reporting procedure could help
treaty bodies to work more effectively, ease the
reporting burden for Member States and encourage
increased compliance with reporting obligations.
However, the European Union wished to know whichA/C.3/67/SR.21
5 12-56502
components of that procedure would have the most
positive impact on the work of committees. Lastly, the
European Union would welcome the Committee’s
views about the need for a code of conduct and the
impact that such a code might have on the independent
nature of the treaty bodies.
16. Ms. Majodina (Chair, Human Rights Committee)
said that she welcomed the acknowledgement by South
Africa of the Committee’s work in protecting the civil
and political rights of people all over the world, given
that the country was emerging from a long period of
political turbulence. However, it was deeply concerned
that South Africa had not yet submitted its initial
report. Like other treaty bodies, the Committee was
facing significant budgetary constraints and had a
backlog of individual communications awaiting
processing. It now took three years for a
communication submitted by an individual to be
considered; justice delayed was justice denied, since
people turned to the Committee as an instance of last
resort. In order to reduce the backlog of State party
reports the Committee had increased the number of
reports considered during a session from four to six.
17. The list of issues prior to reporting, or simplified
reporting procedure as it was now called, eased the
reporting burden considerably given that those States
parties that chose to adopt the voluntary procedure did
not need to submit a report. Instead they had only to
send responses to a list of issues. However, the
procedure was not applicable to initial reports and
could be used only where States parties had already
submitted a previous report. The procedure had been
launched as a pilot, with the first five countries to be
examined in 2013.
18. The overall aim of the treaty body strengthening
process was to enhance the ability of rights-holders to
enjoy their rights. To that end, States parties would
need to inject more resources into the treaty bodies to
ensure that the recommendations made in the report by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights on strengthening the United Nations human
rights treaty body system could be implemented. The
Committee was considering the recommendations and
supported the intergovernmental process as long as it
respected the power of treaty bodies to decide on their
working methods and rules of procedure, as well as the
Committee’s impartiality and independence. Some of
the recommendations made in the report were already
established practice within the Committee, but other
proposals, such as the comprehensive reporting
calendar, would need to be considered from a more
critical standpoint. While the calendar had its merits, it
would entail drastic changes in how States parties
approached their reporting obligations and how the
treaty bodies carried out their work. The Committee
feared that its flexible approach to the submission of
State party reports might be compromised and would
therefore be considering all the recommendations made
in relation to its working methods.
19. Regarding the code of conduct, the Committee
would examine the Guidelines on independence and
impartiality of members of the human rights treaty
bodies drafted in 2012 and consider how they could be
adapted to its rules of procedure and working methods.
However, a code of conduct should not be imposed on
the Committee given that the treaty bodies had already
developed their own tools for self-regulation.
20. The Chair invited the Committee to continue its
general discussion of sub-items (a) and (d) of agenda
item 69.
21. Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro) said that, since
regaining independence in 2006, Montenegro had taken
a more active role in international affairs. At the
national level, the Ministry of Justice and Human
Rights and the Ministry for Minority Rights were the
key Government ministries responsible for developing
and implementing policy for the protection of human
rights and freedoms. However, Montenegro had also
established several working bodies to monitor and
control implementation of both those policies and the
United Nations conventions and treaty body
recommendations.
22. The provisions of the fundamental human rights
instruments had been incorporated into national law
and Montenegro looked forward to receiving and
implementing the recommendations of the Human
Rights Council following review of its second report
submitted under the universal periodic review. Since its
completion of the universal periodic review in 2008,
Montenegro had signed the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, as well as the Optional Protocols to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It had also
submitted initial and periodic reports on several
international treaties and was in the process of
ratifying the Council of Europe Convention on
preventing and combating violence against women andA/C.3/67/SR.21
12-56502 6
domestic violence. As a candidate for membership in
the Human Rights Council for the period 2013-2015,
Montenegro was committed to upholding the values
enshrined in the United Nations Charter and other
universal human rights instruments.
23. Ms. Sumi (Japan) said that Japan had had
withdrawn its reservation to article 13, paragraph 2 (b)
and (c), of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. It welcomed the strengthening of the
human rights treaty body system and valued the role of
the Human Rights Council, particularly the universal
periodic review system. It had carried out a voluntary
follow-up in 2011.
24. Japan was striving to establish gender equality
and the full participation of both men and women in all
areas. Its third Basic Plan for Gender Equality, adopted
in 2010, set targets in line with the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. The Government recognized the pivotal role
played by the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women and would continue to
cooperate actively with it.
25. Japan had signed the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities in 2007 and was preparing to
ratify it, and had amended the Basic Act for Persons
with Disabilities in 2011 in line with the Convention. It
had also established a Board on policies for persons
with disabilities in 2012, which made national policy
recommendations and monitored implementation of
that policy. The Government planned to take further
steps to protect the rights of persons with disabilities,
including legislative amendments.
26. Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) said that his country
was a party to almost all international human rights
instruments and had always allocated significant
resources to economic and social development and to
improving the standard of living of its people. Algeria
was committed to the promotion and protection of
civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights
through the constitutional and legislative framework,
as well as domestic implementation, evaluation and
appeal mechanisms. At the regional level, Algeria
always assumed its share of responsibility for
protecting and promoting human rights.
27. Algeria was undertaking broad political,
economic and social reforms, which would lead to the
adoption of a new Constitution. His Government had
lifted the state of emergency and set out a series of
laws to strengthen the rule of law and representative
democracy, in such areas as political parties,
decriminalizing press offences, opening up the
broadcast media and a guarantee of 30 per cent
representation of women in elected assemblies. Efforts
were being made to enhance the involvement of civil
society in all aspects of public life, reflecting the
Government’s commitment to expanding democracy
and responding to citizens’ needs.
28. With regard to economic, social and cultural
rights, various development plans implemented over
the past decade had significantly improved the standard
and quality of life. Algeria had also expanded aid
programmes helping young people to enter the job
market. His Government adhered to the principle of
universality, with a view to protecting the fundamental
rights of individuals and respecting their dignity. In
that respect, there was no single model for social or
political organization, as universality must be based on
recognition of cultural, historical and geographical
specificities, and on international standards and legal
principles.
29. In line with its aim to avoid politicization and
selectivity, the Human Rights Council should conduct a
rigorous and objective evaluation of implementation of
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action.
Accession to international human rights instruments
must not be selective. In that context, the
non-ratification of the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Their Families by countries which hosted migrant
workers continued to weaken the Convention’s
implementation.
30. Although the international community had made
strides in the protection of human rights, many peoples
remained deprived of their fundamental rights and
from realizing the ideals of peace, progress and
prosperity. In that respect, the right of peoples to their
self-determination in situations of foreign occupation
was a prerequisite to an international order founded on
respect for human rights.
31. Ms. Changtrakul (Thailand) said that human
rights, which were at the heart of her Government’s
domestic and foreign policy, also comprised an aspect
of human security. In that regard, it was endeavouring
to enhance people-centred policies, including through
universal health care, and free and equal educational
opportunities for all. Equal opportunities for vulnerableA/C.3/67/SR.21
7 12-56502
groups were being enhanced, including through the
creation of a national fund to help rural women to
develop their professional potential and leadership in
communities, and through a mechanism and law on
older persons, and measures to ensure implementation
of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing.
Thailand had amended its laws in line with the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
and would continue to help other countries in the
region to build their capacity towards implementation
of the Convention.
32. As a member of the Human Rights Council,
Thailand would continue to advocate for the value of
technical cooperation in enhancing human rights. As a
sign of her Government’s commitment to international
human rights standards, it had withdrawn its
reservations to articles 6 and 9 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, concerning the
abolition of the death penalty for persons below
eighteen years of age, and the obligation to bring
arrested or detained persons on a criminal charge
before a judge or other judicial officer. Thailand was
closely cooperating with the special procedures of the
Human Rights Council, and was committed to
combating human trafficking, as evident from the visit
of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, in August 2011.
Thailand had issued a standing invitation to all special
procedures and was currently arranging for the visit of
the Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe
drinking water and sanitation planned for early 2013.
Lastly, she noted that Thailand would stand for election
to the Council for the term 2015-2017, and would
continue to cooperate with all stakeholders in creating
rights-based societies for all.
33. Ms. Solórzano-Arriagada (Nicaragua) said that
her country had aligned its legislation with
international human rights standards and with the
principles of non-discrimination and equality of all
citizens. Nicaragua was a party to the principal human
rights instruments, the provisions of which were
largely reflected in its Political Constitution and other
legislation. Progress had also been made towards the
adoption and/or ratification of other important human
rights instruments.
34. Eradicating poverty and securing political,
economic, social and cultural rights for the Nicaraguan
people were priorities for her Government, whose
policies and programmes included access to free health
care, food, clean drinking water, education,
employment and housing, and a national human rights
plan which aimed to reduce poverty. The effective
enjoyment of civil and political rights was also
necessary for development. Nicaragua reiterated its
commitment to work towards the promotion,
application and guarantee of human rights to maintain
peace, social justice, equality and the respect for life.
35. Nicaragua had made progress in administrative
and legal matters, setting up agencies which
guaranteed compliance with national and international
human rights standards, with a particular focus on the
most vulnerable groups such as children, adolescents,
women, indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities
and migrants. Her Government had also created an
Atlantic coast development council, which aimed to
strengthen regional bodies and promote development in
the autonomous regions and indigenous communities
along the coast.
36. The justice system had been modernized in recent
years, which had enhanced the protection of human
rights. A public defender’s office had been created, and
the attorney-general’s office had been separated from
the public prosecutor’s office. Such efforts to implement
international human rights instruments, made jointly
with civil society groups through an inter-agency human
rights committee, had led to significant progress,
including the submission of long-awaited reports to
United Nations treaty bodies.
37. Ms. Abubakar (Libya) said that for several
decades the people of her country had been subject to
human rights violations of many kinds, including
murder, torture and extrajudicial killing, at the hands of
a merciless dictatorship. The tyrant Al-Qadhafi had
used the country’s wealth to oppress the people and
deprive them of the most basic rights. The fall of the
Libyan dictator had constituted a major turning point in
the history of the Libyan people toward a new Libya in
which all without exception enjoyed human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
38. Her delegation was unhappy about what were
described in a Human Rights Watch report as human
rights violations during the war against the dictatorship
in Libya, most of which had been committed by
Al-Qadhafi’s forces and mercenaries. The Libyan
authorities expressed regret and disapproval over the
occurrence of such violations and intended to
investigate all those that might have been committedA/C.3/67/SR.21
12-56502 8
by the revolutionaries during the war or after the fall of
the regime. Indeed, the Libyan people, having revolted
against injustice, could not accept any further human
rights violations.
39. The new Libya was bent on respecting all its
undertakings under international instruments for the
promotion and protection of human rights. Political
parties had come into being and there was now
freedom of the press, freedom of expression,
unconditional freedom to assemble and demonstrate
and freedom to establish civil society organizations and
trade unions. Amid the many challenges facing the
Government, the question of human rights remained
paramount. Practical steps towards promoting and
protecting human rights included the establishment of
the National Council for Public Liberties and Human
Rights; preparation of an integrated programme of
action for the promotion and protection of human
rights; the ongoing investigation into human rights
violations that had occurred during the 17 February
revolution; the simplification of entry procedures for
non-governmental human rights organizations;
invitations to visit Libya to the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances; and launching of
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for technical
assistance and capacity-building.
40. Libya affirmed the principles of independence of
the judiciary and separation of powers. Her
Government was eager to conduct, under the
supervision of the Libyan State, fair trials for persons
accused of specific offences, in which the criteria of
international law and human rights law were observed.
It was also avidly seeking to ascertain the fate of
thousands of disappeared persons. She commended the
role being played by civil society organizations in
promoting a culture of human rights and respect for the
rights and freedoms of others.
41. Mr. Al-Obaidi (Iraq) said that the complete
withdrawal of foreign troops from his country and the
recovery of its national sovereignty had marked the
end of a difficult period that had adversely affected the
Iraqi human rights situation. It had also removed any
pretext for terrorist groups whose operations had
depended on the presence of such troops. Some armed
groups had joined the political process and put aside
their arms under the project of national reconciliation.
42. Throughout those events, his Government had
made enormous efforts to promote a culture of human
rights based on the Iraqi Constitution and the country’s
international commitments and to establish peaceful
coexistence among the groups that constituted the Iraqi
people, as demonstrated by the country’s National
Action Plan on Human Rights, which was based
largely on the recommendations made by the Human
Rights Council during the universal periodic review of
Iraq, in February 2010. The draft Plan had been
reviewed at a meeting that included representatives of
the United Nations, the European Union and the
diplomatic missions accredited in Iraq. The Plan,
which was expected to be implemented by the start of
2014, called for Iraq to accede to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment and the adoption of a law on
Iraq’s accession to the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
The instrument of accession would be deposited as
soon as possible.
43. Iraq had withdrawn its reservation to article 9 of
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women . It had submitted its
periodic report in respect of that Convention and would
shortly submit its reports under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its two Optional
Protocols and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights. In the preparation those
reports, civil-society organizations had played an
outstanding role.
44. His country had received and facilitated the work
of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries and
the final steps were being taken to receive the Special
Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment within the
framework of an open invitation to visit the country
extended by the Government to mandate holders of
special procedures as a voluntary commitment in the
context of the universal periodic review.
45. The establishment of the High Commission for
Human Rights had reached the final stages: the
Commissioners had been selected by the Committee of
Experts and included a representative of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). Speedy
measures were being taken for the adoption of a
number of draft laws relating to the performance of theA/C.3/67/SR.21
9 12-56502
country’s international commitments and constitutional
provisions pertaining to rights and freedoms. They
included laws on freedom of speech, assembly and
peaceful protest; the right of access to information;
political parties; combating trafficking in human
beings; and labour. Legislation aimed at the realization
of the Millennium Development Goals and the
promotion of rights had also been enacted in the fields
of poverty reduction; the advancement of women and
the elimination of violence; and policymaking to
reduce unemployment.
46. Post-2003 Iraq had inherited from the previous
regime a heavy legacy of human rights violations
involving mass graves, the killing or forced
displacement of anyone who opposed the regime,
including scholars and intellectuals, and demographic
changes. His delegation appealed to the international
community to aid the Government in its efforts to
overcome the adverse consequences of that legacy
through the identification of victims, the uncovering of
mass graves and support to technical staff. The Iraqi
Government had identified those crimes by organizing
conferences, the first of which had been held in
London in January 2011; others conferences would be
organized with a view to international condemnation of
the crimes of the Saddam Hussein dictatorship as
crimes against humanity, so as to provide some
vindication and psychological rehabilitation for the
victims.
47. The greatest challenge to human rights in Iraq lay
in terrorism, which affected innocent, unarmed
civilians, though it had declined from 2010 to 2011, a
sign of the success achieved by the police and security
forces.
48. The Iraqi Government had signed with the United
Nations a memorandum of understanding closing the
case of the members of the Iranian Mojahedin-e-Khalq
Organization in a voluntary, peaceful fashion
consistent with human rights standards, with a view to
their relocation to a third country under United Nations
supervision.
49. Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) said that the promotion and
protection of human rights was a principle deeply
rooted in Sudanese society. His country had ratified all
the international human rights instruments and their
provisions had been incorporated into national
legislation. In that context, cooperation agreements had
been concluded with South Sudan and the transitional
authority structures for the Darfur region had been
integrated thanks to the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. As a result, the Darfur states had entered a new
phase of stability marked by the voluntary return of
thousands to their homes and a decline in violence,
except on the part of a few rebel movements that had
not signed the document.
50. Positive human rights developments in his
country included the setting up of an independent
National Commission for Human Rights; the
establishment of a special court on Darfur crimes and
the appointment of a public prosecutor to investigate
all human rights violations that had occurred since the
start of the conflict in Darfur. In Blue Nile and South
Kordofan states, the Government had begun practical
arrangements with the partners to the humanitarian
tripartite initiative with a view to its implementation,
which had been slowed down by the obstacles created
by the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement, Northern
Sector. In Abyei, the Government had recently signed a
memorandum of understanding on the status of forces
even though the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) had completed its deployment
before the memorandum was signed, thanks to the
cooperation of the Government, which had also
ensured unrestricted freedom of movement for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The common aim in all the cases
mentioned had been to ensure that the people of his
country enjoyed all their lawful rights.
51. Sudan had promulgated a law on children in 2010
and had established units for the protection of children,
women and the family within the armed forces and the
police and a unit to combat violence against women
and children within the Ministry of Welfare and Social
Security. It had drafted a law on disabled persons and
established a national council to protect their interests
and safeguard their rights. The country’s traditional
and religious values ensured that the elderly were
viewed with esteem, and homes for their care had been
established.
52. Human rights connected with freedom of
expression were accorded extreme importance in his
country’s laws and protected under its Constitution. In
addition to more than 50 daily newspapers and a
number of international magazines, there were at least
seven satellite television channels and an equal number
of radio broadcasting stations. They included only one
Government television channel and two GovernmentA/C.3/67/SR.21
12-56502 10
radio stations. Nothing in the country’s laws prevented
freedom of expression.
53. The Human Rights Council resolution
(A/HRC/RES/11/10) renewing the mandate of the
Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in
the Sudan under agenda item 10, on technical assistance
and capacity building, rather than under item 4, which
involved monitoring, had been welcomed by his
country and confirmed that human rights in the Sudan
were steadily improving. His country reaffirmed its
commitment to cooperation with the United Nations
human rights mechanisms, but hoped that the sole way
of dealing with the related issues would be constructive
dialogue that shunned any politicization of those issues
or violation of State sovereignty.
54. The universality of human rights required that
they be dealt with as a whole. His delegation called for
economic, social and cultural rights to be given
attention equivalent to civil and political rights. It also
called for the dissemination of values of tolerance
conducive to balanced dialogue among religions and
cultures and an end to efforts to impose a particular
value system on others or to destroy the other, given
that all religions had the same divine source and
civilizations and cultures were human achievements
whose particularities should be respected. It stressed
the importance of the family as the basic unit of society
and the need to challenge the recent attempts forcibly
to introduce new gender concepts whose definitions
were not recognized internationally, while clearly
ignoring deep-rooted religious, cultural and traditional
particularities.
55. While freedom of expression was clearly needed,
it must not be exploited to incite hatred or denigrate
religions. His delegation condemned the recent film
insulting the Prophet Muhammad just as it had earlier
condemned insulting caricatures. It trusted that the
Assembly would take action to protect all religions.
His delegation appealed for concern for the rights of
the weak and vulnerable people of the world, including
minorities, emigrants and victims of occupation in
unlawfully appropriated Arab lands.
56. Collective action through multilateral
mechanisms without discrimination between States was
the appropriate way to promote human rights,
particularly as there was no country large or small that
was free of human rights issues.
57. Ms. Al-Amiri (Qatar) said that the economic,
social and political changes that had marked the start
of the new millennium had heightened the importance
of human rights issues. Her country had brought its
penal code into line with the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, to which, along with
numerous other regional and international human rights
instruments, it had acceded. It had considered with an
open mind the report on its human rights situation
presented in the context of the universal periodic
review of the Human Rights Council and had
implemented many of the Council’s recommendations.
It celebrated a yearly national human rights day, an
indication that the promotion and protection of human
rights were considered an inseparable part of the
country’s identity and culture.
58. Numerous institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights had been established in the
country, both governmental and non-governmental. In
keeping with its reform policy and growing concern
with the promotion and protection of human rights,
Qatar had offered to host the United Nations Human
Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-
West Asia and the Arab Region, created by General
Assembly resolution 60/153. The Centre, placed under
the supervision of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, had opened in
May 2009. It had conducted important regional training
activities and consultations concerning the United
Nations human rights mechanisms, the media and
human rights education and provided support to human
rights organizations in the region. Qatar, as host
country, had offered the Centre considerable support
since its foundation, but because of the growing
demand for its services, the Centre would not be able
to carry out its mandate efficiently unless it was
adequately funded from the regular budget of the
United Nations. Such funding on an ongoing basis was
vital to guarantee the proper performance of its
programmes, the development of training and
documentation activities and the transparency,
reliability and independence of the Centre. His
Government remained committed to providing the
necessary support and financing for the Centre’s
programmes and activities.
59. Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) reiterated his
Government’s support for the work of the treaty
bodies. The treaty body system involved multipleA/C.3/67/SR.21
11 12-56502
stakeholders, and its committees must reflect broad
participation in discussions on the intergovernmental
process for strengthening those bodies. Any changes to
that system should improve compliance with
obligations and increase the protections that treaty
bodies granted to rights holders.
60. Costa Rica supported the proposals for a
comprehensive reporting calendar, simplified reporting
procedure, page limits and the use of modern
technologies (A/67/222, paragraph 32 (a)). He
requested more information on the technical criteria
relating to the different committees and their Chairs
especially regarding proposals related to individual
communications. States must do their utmost to ensure
financial resources for implementation of those
proposals.
61. Costa Rica had worked to strengthen the treaty
bodies and hoped that an agreement could soon be
reached on a comprehensive and systematic long-term
solution. Nevertheless, that should not prevent the
General Assembly from deciding on urgent measures
required to prevent the treaty bodies from entering into
a greater crisis, even if they had financial implications.
The Committee Chairs’ endorsement of the Guidelines
on independence and impartiality of members of the
human rights treaty bodies was welcome; they were
key to the functioning of those bodies. The holding of
chairs’ meetings in different regions was a welcome
initiative, and he hoped that the next such meeting
could be held in his region, with participation from
national human rights institutions and their
organizations.
62. Ms. Cavanagh (New Zealand) said that
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities was a significant step in
ensuring that such persons could live in societies where
they were valued, and more efforts to ensure their full
participations were needed, particularly regarding
international cooperation. Her Government welcomed
the broad support for that Convention, and called on
States which had not yet ratified it to do so. Persons
with disabilities were often amongst the most
vulnerable members of society, and their vulnerability
should not be misconstrued as inability or dependency.
World Bank estimates on the annual loss of global
gross domestic product due to the exclusion of persons
with disabilities from economic income activities
reflected the need to mainstream disabilities into
development planning.
63. Her Government had welcomed in particular the
progress made in integrating the rights of persons with
disabilities in the context of the Millennium
Development Goals. Data disaggregated by disability
must be produced to support the planning and
monitoring of efforts to make the post-2015
development framework inclusive and accessible. In
the light of the important work of the Committee on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, it was of deep
concern that the Committee was unable to consider
periodic reports in a timely manner. It was thus
imperative to adopt the request for two weeks’
additional annual meeting time and two weeks of
pre-session meeting time to facilitate the Committee’s
work. The rights of persons with disabilities must be
addressed equally within the United Nations system. A
concerted effort was needed to enhance the effective
functioning of the Convention’s reporting system and
the entire human rights treaty body system.
64. Mr. Och (Mongolia) said that States should
implement sound policies and international cooperation
should be enhanced to address the challenges to
effective implementation of human rights, which
included corruption, a democratic deficit and a lack of
capacity and expertise. In that regard, States needed
more substantive support from the international
community through enhanced technical assistance and
advice on capacity-building and human rights
education.
65. His Government, in the context of its ratification
of the Second Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, was
undertaking step-by-step measures to amend its
legislation with the aim of abolishing the death penalty
in law and practice. It had also been carrying out a
range of legal reforms to bring its national laws into
line with international standards. His Government had
published a bulletin to disseminate the human rights
conventions to which it was a party, and, in 2009, had
passed a resolution enabling national courts to directly
invoke the provisions of international human rights
standards and norms.
66. His Government also attached great importance
to its reporting obligations under human rights treaties,
and considered the universal periodic review a unique
mechanism for promoting human rights worldwide. It
had submitted its first report on the implementation of
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities earlier in 2012. Moreover, among hisA/C.3/67/SR.21
12-56502 12
Government’s priorities was the protection of women
and children’s rights, as evidenced by its signing of an
agreement on cooperation to combat trafficking in
persons in the region.
67. Lastly, his Government welcomed the
recommendations made by the Working Group on
business and human rights, which had recently visited
Mongolia. They corresponded with its policy of
providing an effective remedy for citizens whose
human rights were affected by business activities.
68. Mr. Momen (Bangladesh) said that the universal
periodic review was effective in helping to improve the
global human rights situation. His Government was
committed to building a society free from exploitation,
where fundamental human rights and freedoms,
equality and justice were secure and all citizens were
equal before the law. Its position on human rights was
based on the principles of universality, non-selectivity
and objectivity. Its Constitution embodied the
provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, irrespective of religion, race, caste or sex, and
contained special provisions to ensure the rights of
women, children and minorities.
69. Bangladesh had signed, ratified and acceded to
nearly all the key international human rights
instruments; in 2011, it had ratified the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families. His
Government engaged in constructive dialogue with the
international community in espousing the cause of
human rights, which should prevail without political
manoeuvring.
70. His Government had regularly updated its laws to
ensure compatibility with various human rights
instruments. It had ensured freedoms of speech,
expression and thought. It had also enacted legislation
to promote the rights of children and women. The
existing legislation on persons with disabilities was
being harmonized with the provisions of the relevant
Convention and among the measures it was
undertaking in that context were programmes for
student stipends, special and inclusive schools for
students with disabilities and quotas. Effective,
independent national mechanisms were the best
safeguards against human rights violations, and his
country’s national human rights commission was
empowered to inquire suo moto into any complaint of
violation.
71. In the context of human rights learning, his
Government provided regular training on human rights
issues to public officials, especially in law
enforcement. That had already yielded positive results
on the ground.
72. Human rights should be addressed from an
integrated and holistic approach. Civil and political
rights and economic, cultural and social rights,
including the right to development, were of equal
importance, and it was crucial to help the more
vulnerable societies to meet a minimum standard of
living, and enjoy the right to education and to health
care and shelter. Failing that, poverty and unmet
aspirations for development would stifle the political
process and undermine democracy. A collective effort
and understanding of all Member States was needed in
that regard.
73. Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran) said
that, nearly two decades after the adoption of the
Vienna Declaration, many concerns, including
enhanced international cooperation in human rights and
the realization of the right to development, remained
unaddressed. The international community must give
equal attention to economic, social and cultural rights
and political and civil rights, including the binding
nature of the right to development. Religious and
national specificities, as well as cultural diversities,
must be given serious consideration in order to curb the
growing trends of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance which threatened
some societies.
74. It was regrettable that most manifestations of
those trends were occurring against one religion and its
followers, namely Islam and Muslims, as illustrated by
the recent film, which was produced in the United
States of America and was offensive and insulting to
the Prophet Mohammad. Such manifestations of
religious intolerance reflected the dire need to take
collective and preventive action against such fast-
growing religious intolerance.
75. Poverty alleviation should be made a central
theme of the human rights machinery, with the burden
falling to the States which used other countries’ labour
force and human resources. The international
community had a long way to go to achieve the ideals
under the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action, and it was timely to assess progress and
shortcomings to attaining those ideals.A/C.3/67/SR.21
13 12-56502
76. Iran reaffirmed its commitment to the
universality, interdependence and equality of all human
rights, and noted the urgent need to curb the trend of
selectivity and economic and political exploitation
which continued to taint the international order.
77. Mr. Kasymov (Kyrgyzstan) said that the human
rights instruments most recently signed by Kyrgyzstan
were the Optional Protocol to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment and the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Kyrgyzstan had
also become a party to the Second Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty.
78. The Kyrgyz Constitution of 2010 abolished the
death penalty and assigned the utmost importance to
human rights and freedoms. All draft laws affecting the
interests of citizens were subject to public debate. An
Ombudsman’s office was operating effectively in
Kyrgyzstan. In addition, the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, had
recently visited the country.
79. His delegation welcomed the recent launch of the
intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system, pursuant to
resolution 66/254, and supported the efforts of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to raise public
awareness of the work of the treaty bodies. At the same
time, the treaty bodies must ensure that their
conclusions and recommendations were realistic and
took account of the interests of all relevant parties.
80. The United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20) had recognized the importance
of human rights for sustainable development. In that
context, it was vital to ensure a balance between civil
and political rights on the one hand and economic,
social and cultural rights on the other, particularly in
developing countries, where human rights protection
was understood to imply improved living conditions.
Those countries should be provided with greater
assistance in order to achieve their development goals
Statements in exercise of the right of reply
81. Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) said that the allegations
made by a representative of the Russian Federation at
the twentieth meeting regarding Christians in Egypt
were inaccurate and unfounded, noting that Egypt’s
Coptic Christians had been an integral part of Egyptian
society for thousands of years, without discrimination,
before or after the democratic revolution of 2011. His
Government ensured the enjoyment of equal rights and
freedoms of religion or belief for all Egyptians,
guaranteed under its Constitution. All Egyptians could
freely exercise and practice their religion.
82. He reiterated his Government’s commitment to
protecting the right of freedom of expression and
opinion, when it was used to promote mutual
understanding, respect, and acceptance. It was hoped
that the Government of the Russian Federation ensured
such freedoms as well, including for Muslim minorities
in their territories, or the Chechen people and their
right to self-determination.
83. Mr. Win (Republic of the Union of Myanmar),
responding to a statement made by the representative
of Saudi Arabia, said that the exercise of religious
freedom in Myanmar was well known throughout the
world, and the Government provided equal treatment to
all faiths. The country’s Constitution provided
safeguards against religious discrimination and
intolerance. Interfaith harmony was a time-honoured
tradition in the country, as evidenced by the fact that
Buddhist pagodas, Christian churches, Muslim
mosques and Sikh temples could be seen side by side
throughout the country. The Government of Myanmar
encouraged its population to preserve its respective
religious traditions and practices, including through
financial and other support to that end, for example to
facilitate annual pilgrimages for followers of the
Islamic faith.
84. The violence in Rakhine State had been triggered
by two communities earlier in the year, and both had
lost lives and property. His Government had taken
measures to address that situation, including through
legal action against perpetrators and measures under
existing laws to prevent similar actions from occurring
in the future. An independent commission had been set
up to investigate the incidents. His Government was
also cooperating with religious and community leaders,
and had facilitated a number of visits by United
Nations officials and representatives of other
international and regional agencies to Myanmar; it had
recently extended an invitation to the Secretary-
General of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation to
come to assess the situation on the ground. The overallA/C.3/67/SR.21
12-56502 14
situation was returning to normal. Accusations made by
some were unfounded.
85. The violence that had recently erupted in Rakhine
State was neither a conflict between two religious
groups, nor a humanitarian issue. Humanitarian
assistance was being provided to the affected people
without interruption, and additional assistance to both
communities was always welcome.
86. Mr. Oyateru (Nigeria), in response to the
statement by a representative of the Russian Federation
that a radical Islamist movement continued to
exterminate Christians in Nigeria, said that the actions
of the Boko Haram did not target Christians, but
affected persons of any faith indiscriminately, and his
Government was undertaking joint counter-terrorism
efforts with others to address the situation. His
Government did not tolerate any kind of killing,
regardless of motive, and all Nigerians of good
conscience had condemned the violent acts perpetrated
by that group. He invited that representative to seek
accurate information, which his Government stood
ready to provide at all times.
87. Mr. Al-Obaidi (Iraq), in relation to the reference
made by a representative of the Russian Federation on
religious minorities in Iraq, said that Christians in Iraq
had been exposed to the same indiscriminate terrorism
as all Iraqis, perpetrated by groups such as Al-Qaida.
88. His Government had taken measures to protect all
its people, including religious minorities, through
enhanced protection in places of worship and the
guarantee to exercise religion in all safety. An order had
been given to create a Christian affairs office that
would report to the President and have full knowledge
of all situations of injustice against Christians. Article 7
of the Iraqi Constitution prohibited behaviours which
incited or glorified racism, terrorism or ethnic
cleansing.
89. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the
reference made to her country by the representative of
Saudi Arabia at the twentieth meeting was misleading,
and was in line with his Government’s policy of
encouraging terrorism in the Syrian Arab Republic.
90. The representative of Saudi Arabia claimed that
his country had succeeded in combating terrorism and
radical thinking, yet it was well-known that the roots of
radicalism that offended Islam were anchored in a
Saudi school of thought which was harmful to Muslims
around the world and undermined Islam. Saudi Arabia
hosted thousands of persons who propagated terrorist
theory against her country. The Salafi philosophy
incited upheaval on Syrian streets and sowed the seeds
of factional and sectarian sedition. It undermined all
development achievements and the concept of a
modern State.
91. Moreover, in Saudi Arabia, peaceful
demonstrators were repressed and killed, more than
30,000 political prisoners were held in Saudi jails, and
a travel ban was imposed on persons who expressed
their opinion or assembled peacefully. All the while,
Saudi authorities provided weapons and funds to
terrorist groups in the Syrian Arab Republic.
92. Ms. Abubakar (Libya) said that her country was
a party to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, and noted that the
allegation made by a representative of the Russian
Federation about the exodus of thousands of Christians
from Libya did not accurately reflect the situation of
Christians living in her country. Those who had fled
the country had been motivated by the same desire as
others — to find peace. Libyans were known for their
tolerance and peaceful coexistence.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.