United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.39
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
7 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-61572 (E)
*1061572*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 39th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 2 November 2010, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
later: Ms. Ploder. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Austria)
Contents
Agenda item 63: Report of the Human Rights CouncilA/C.3/65/SR.39
10-61572 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 63: Report of the Human Rights Council
(A/65/53 and Add.1, and Corr.1, and A/65/333)
1. Mr. Phuangketkeow (President of the Human
Rights Council) said that, during its fourth cycle, the
Council had made significant progress in the realms of
civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights.
Furthermore, the universal periodic review had thus far
examined 127 Member States.
2. The Council had addressed traditional issues such
as human rights, the right to food and the right to
development, but also the impact of the global
economic and financial crises on human rights, the
protection of journalists in situations of armed conflict,
and the adverse effects of toxic waste on human rights.
In addition, it had been seized with human rights
situations occurring in various parts of the world,
including support for the post-earthquake recovery
process in Haiti, the Israeli attack on the aid flotilla
and the human rights situation in Somalia.
3. Two more special procedures mandates had been
established: a special rapporteur on the rights of
freedom of association and assembly and a working
group on the elimination of discrimination against
women in law and in practice. The Council had also set
up a working group to draft the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training
and a working group to consider the possibility of
elaborating an international regulatory framework in
relation to the activities of private military and security
companies. It had also extended the mandate of the
Working Group tasked with the elaboration of an
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child in order to provide a communications
procedure.
4. The addendum to the report included seven
resolutions recommended for further actions by the
General Assembly; three with specific requests and
invitations addressed to the Assembly, while four
established new mandates or activities giving rise to
additional resource requirements. The Council had also
recommended that the General Assembly should
proclaim international days for the right to the truth
concerning gross human rights violations and for the
dignity of victims, and for victims of enforced
disappearance.
5. During the fifth cycle the Council needed to
maintain the pace and progress of its regular work
while undergoing the review process in conjunction
with the General Assembly. The process should be
pragmatic and realistic; it would provide a unique
opportunity to assess the way in which the Council
functioned, and identify areas where its effectiveness
could be enhanced. The focus would be on how to
create more impact on the ground, how to better
address both chronic and emergency human rights
violations and how to make best use of time and
available resources to fulfil its mandates.
6. The working relationship between the Council
and the General Assembly was one of the aspects to be
addressed during the review. The nature of the Council
implied that mandates could be created at any time
during the year while the General Assembly considered
the Council’s proposals only once a year. That system
could delay the provision of resources for new
mandates and activities; moreover, prompt support
from the General Assembly was even more critical
when the Council was dealing with urgent human
rights issues.
7. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
Iceland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Turkey; the stabilization and association process
countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition, Armenia,
Georgia, Liechtenstein, Norway, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine, recalled the general comments
of the European Union in relation to the statement
made by the President of the Human Rights Council
regarding the dialogue between the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the
Human Rights Council. The understanding of the
European Union was that the statement did not alter in
any way the independence of the High Commissioner
or her accountability to the United Nations Secretary-
General, in line with established United Nations rules
and procedures.
8. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that during the five years
since its establishment, the role of the Human Rights
Council in dealing with questions relating to human
rights and fundamental freedoms had evolved
favourably. It was based on dialogue, cooperation,
mutual understanding and avoidance of confrontation
and selectivity. The universal periodic review,
complaint mechanisms, the Forum on Minority IssuesA/C.3/65/SR.39
3 10-61572
and the system of special rapporteurs working within
frameworks defined by clear mandates granted by the
Council in keeping with its code of conduct had all
strengthened its role in consolidating the foundations
adopted in the 2005 World Summit Outcome, in
particular the principle that the protection of human
rights was basically the responsibility of national
Governments and that the strengthening of those rights
implied respect for the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of States and for their sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
9. The promotion and protection of all human rights
required a commitment to apply the universal periodic
review to all States without discrimination within an
interactive framework including non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and all segments of civil society.
It required all States to cooperate with special
rapporteurs in accordance with their respective
mandates, including invitations for field visits and
prompt response to complaints and inquiries; respect
by mandate holders for the limits of their mandates, the
code of conduct and assignments given them by the
Council; objectivity and accuracy in reporting;
avoidance of selectivity or attempts to impose narrow
criteria; and transparent dialogue between mandate
holders and the Governments of the States concerned.
Early warning mechanisms must be adopted for
non-politicized, documented information concerning
cases of grave human rights violations and States must
cooperate with fact-finding missions established by the
Council, especially in the case of peoples under
occupation or suffering from conflicts. Politically
motivated accusations made, on the basis of double
standards or without a full investigation of the facts
should be avoided as well.
10. In June 2010 Egypt had completed the universal
periodic review process. Being fully supportive of the
cooperative approach in dealing with human rights
issues and serious about confronting the challenges it
faced in that regard, it was currently developing the
necessary institutional framework to implement the
recommendations that had emerged from the review, a
framework based on cooperation and integration
between the efforts of the Government and civil society
in coordination with the Egyptian National Council on
Human Rights. It was engaged in intensive efforts to
promote the activity of the Human Rights Council and
ensure integration among all existing human rights
mechanisms, both national and international, with a
view to establishing all universally accepted human
rights principles on an equal footing. In its role as
current chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, Egypt
would strive to ensure the continuation of that
approach in the development of the Council’s working
methods in the context of their ongoing review in
Geneva and in New York.
11. The international community’s human rights
endeavours were sabotaged by the constant efforts of
some to impose themselves as custodians of human
rights for the world, based on the untenable conviction
that their values and systems were superior though they
failed to address violations at home, as well as efforts
to undermine balance among the principal United
Nations organs and respect for the oversight of the
General Assembly over the Human Rights Council,
special procedures and treaty bodies.
12. The current discussion of the Report of the
Human Rights Council would help pave the way to
consensus on objective, comprehensive treatment of all
human rights issues within a constructive framework
based on equality among all aspects of those rights,
whether civil, political, economic, social or cultural.
He looked forward to enhanced international
cooperation in meeting the aspiration of the peoples of
the world to realize the right to development and to
combat all forms of discrimination in accordance with
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and
without imposing any conditionalities or disputed
concepts that were not supported by international law
or failed to take into account social, cultural, religious
and religious differences.
13. Ms. Zhang (China) said that, four years after its
creation, the Human Rights Council’s work in various
areas was on track. Although there were still
shortcomings and problems, its overall performance
had been good, which had contributed to the promotion
of human rights worldwide. Thus, the review should
assess the Council’s achievements and shortcomings
over the years and make targeted improvements in
accordance with the institution-building package and
the principles set forth in the General Assembly
resolution. The consultation process must be open,
transparent and inclusive, with a positive approach by
all parties to the dialogue with a view to reaching
consensus. The Council and the Third Committee
should further define their division of labour in order
to avoid duplication.A/C.3/65/SR.39
10-61572 4
14. China had been working relentlessly to promote
human rights at the national level and had
conscientiously fulfilled its duty as a member of the
Human Rights Council. Its aim was to have a Council
which addressed human rights on the basis of
objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity, which
facilitated international dialogue and cooperation on
human rights and which worked to advance the cause
of human rights.
15. Mr. Ali (Sudan) said that the Human Rights
Council had proven to be a step in the right direction
and an important element in building the
Organization’s human rights machinery. His delegation
stressed the importance of review, but understood that
the debate under way in Geneva related to a review of
the Council’s work and functioning, not changes in its
rules or institutional structure. It was important to
maintain what had been previously agreed and not
open the door to disagreements by reviewing the rules
and structures on which the Council had been founded
and which had proven their effectiveness in protecting
human rights.
16. The Sudan was currently preparing to submit its
report in the context of the universal periodic review.
Its competent agencies were striving to meet that
obligation through monitoring and assessing human
rights developments, especially in the wake of the
passage of the 2005 interim Constitution, which was
based on values relating to the protection and
promotion of human rights, especially in the sphere of
democratic transformation, political pluralism and
citizenship. The United Nations independent expert on
the situation of human rights in the Sudan had referred
to many aspects of those developments, the most
important of which had been the holding of
presidential and parliamentary elections in a
democratic and peaceful climate marked by
transparency. The concern of the political leadership in
the Sudan with the periodic review report was reflected
in presidential directives that entrusted the preparation
of the report to a national committee comprised of
representatives of the Government and civil society.
17. That effort was being made despite the
multiplicity of international and regional mechanisms
concerned and their direct presence in the Sudan. It
included the organization of direct meetings between
human rights experts and United Nations missions in
the Sudan, especially in Darfur, for the orderly review
of all the relevant developments. The Sudan had shown
full cooperation with the independent expert appointed
by the Council.
18. All those facts confirmed the Sudan’s belief in
the need to continue the role of the Council, while
avoiding politicization and selectivity and relying on
dialogue and cooperation. It was important to focus on
technical assistance and capacity-building in the work
of country mandates and not to resort to accusations
that affected relations between the country concerned
and the mandate holder.
19. His delegation valued the Council’s efforts to
promote the human rights of the Palestinian people and
its adoption of the Goldstone report. It stressed the
importance of punishing the perpetrators of the crimes
committed against children, women and the elderly in
Gaza, which had become an enormous prison.
20. Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) said that, as a
member of the Human Rights Council, Burkina Faso
had defined an institutional framework including the
Government and civil society organizations to prepare
relevant reports and follow up their recommendations.
The second national citizenship week, held annually to
mark the adoption of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, had been devoted to a reflection on
mechanisms to assess the promotion of human rights.
The participants had received training on the universal
periodic review, the African Peer Review Mechanism
and the role of the African Union.
21. The large number of reports to be drawn up in a
limited time represented an extra burden for
developing countries, and his delegation once again
appealed for technical and financial support from the
United Nations and from other States. He also called
on the treaty bodies to rationalize and harmonize the
complex human rights assessment methods, in order to
lighten the task of developing countries and increase
the effectiveness of those mechanisms.
22. Mr. Apakan (Turkey) said that the report of the
Human Rights Council contained two important
resolutions; in particular, resolution 15/1 on follow-up
to the report of the independent international fact-
finding mission on the May 2010 incident when Israeli
forces attacked the humanitarian aid convoy to Gaza in
international waters.
23. Based on testimonies and other information
gathered, the report considered that the attack
constituted a grave violation of human rights law andA/C.3/65/SR.39
5 10-61572
international law. It also enumerated a series of
violations of Israel’s obligations under international
human rights law and reaffirmed the illegality of the
blockade on Gaza. In the view of Turkey, the report
gave a fair account of the events based on solid facts
and legal documents, and the vast majority of the
international community endorsed its findings and
conclusions.
24. Turkey called on Israel to acknowledge its
mistakes and to act accordingly. It expected a formal
apology and compensation for the wounded and for the
families of the deceased. It had not submitted a
separate resolution on the issue to the General
Assembly. However, it could review its position, in
consultation with other relevant groups and countries,
depending on the Israeli attitude in the coming weeks.
25. The Turkish Commission of Investigation had
also carried out an objective study and examined the
legal implications of the attack. The resulting interim
report had been presented to the panel of inquiry
established by the Secretary-General.
26. Turkey also welcomed resolution 15/6 on follow-
up to the report of the United Nations Committee of
independent experts in international humanitarian and
human rights law established pursuant to Council
resolution 13/9 concerning the fact-finding mission on
the Gaza conflict (the Goldstone report) and would
follow up on the implementation of its
recommendations.
27. Fighting impunity and establishing accountability
had always been one of the objectives of the United
Nations. The resolutions mentioned clearly addressed
that objective. As long as justice has not been done,
peace would always remain elusive.
28. Ms. Sahussarungsi (Thailand) said that the
upcoming review of the Human Rights Council should
take into consideration the need for it to continue to
address human rights challenges in an even-handed
manner. The Council must explore ways to engage
constructively with countries of concern so that they
recognized that it was in their own interest to improve
their human rights situation. Consequently, it should
continue working to reduce the politicization of human
rights issues.
29. The universal periodic review mechanism,
especially in its second cycle, should focus on effective
facilitation and implementation of recommendations.
Thailand viewed the universal periodic review as a
landmark innovation in the United Nations human
rights system. Many countries that had undergone the
process had amended legislation or practices and
adopted new policies, programmes and measures aimed
at improving their human rights situation. Those
successes must be consolidated by ensuring effective
implementation and follow-up.
30. It was essential to continue improving the
relationship between the Council and the special
procedures by enhancing mutual cooperation and
building trust and confidence. Moreover, the Council’s
work should be streamlined, reducing the proliferation
of resolutions; rather, efforts should focus on the
implementation of resolutions for real impact on the
ground.
31. In December, Thailand would be hosting a retreat
on the Human Rights Council review process to
promote candid discussions, not only for the
47 Council members but for all the United Nations
Member States, while raising the Council’s profile in
the Asia-Pacific region. Thailand looked forward to
working closely with the Council to further the cause
of human rights.
32. Ms. Belskaya (Belarus) said that Belarus took a
positive view of the work performed by the Human
Rights Council and welcomed the aspiration by
Member States for dialogue and constructive
engagement within that body. Recalling the Council’s
effective conduct of special sessions on such issues as
the Haiti earthquake and the occupied Palestinian
territory, she conveyed her delegation’s approval of the
wide coverage of the Council’s activities over the
period under review, which bore witness to its pursuit
of a balanced approach to the myriad human rights
questions on its agenda. Belarus also welcomed the
increased attention being paid by the Council to the
issue of human trafficking and supported the idea of
setting up a special anti-trafficking unit within
OHCHR. Turning to the issue of special procedures,
she noted with approval the growing importance
attached to those procedures in the Council’s work and
welcomed their strengthening but also stressed the
need for strict observance of the Code of Conduct by
the special procedures mandate holders.
33. She conveyed her country’s satisfaction with the
work achieved under the universal periodic review
process and its conviction that, when implemented byA/C.3/65/SR.39
10-61572 6
Member States, the ensuing recommendations would
substantially improve the situation of human rights in
the countries concerned. At the same time, Belarus
stressed that the review was a voluntary collaborative
arrangement between States and reiterated its
categorical opposition to its use as a means of exerting
pressure on States, including through the adoption of
unacceptable and politicized recommendations. In that
context, Belarus supported the view of the
Non-Aligned Movement that the review in New York
of the status of the Human Rights Council should only
take place after the process of reviewing its activities
and operation had been concluded in Geneva. Belarus
was also of the view that neither review should result
in radical changes to the operation of the Council and it
would only support recommendations which would not
overburden the Council or undermine the cooperative
atmosphere that prevailed within it.
34. Mr. Berti (Cuba) said that the working methods
and agenda of the Human Rights Council revealed its
respect for sound democratic principles. However,
significant challenges and threats remained to the
climate of genuine dialogue and cooperation in its
work. Cuba was concerned that it had not been possible
to end all the country mandates established on a
discriminatory and selective basis and reaffirmed the
importance that the Council’s special procedures
should respect the principles of objectivity and
impartiality, as well as the Code of Conduct.
35. Nevertheless, on the whole, the Council’s work to
date should be assessed positively. It had established
effective practices for a comprehensive analysis of the
human rights situation in the world, and the climate of
respect and trust that was essential for its work. It had
also revealed its capacity to tackle emergency
situations, such as the serious violations of the human
rights of the Palestinian people perpetrated by Israel.
36. The Human Rights Council review process would
begin shortly and Cuba stressed the need to ensure a
technical, transparent and inclusive intergovernmental
process, first in Geneva and then in New York. No
radical changes in the way the Council functioned were
needed. The main purpose of the review should be to
enhance the elements of cooperation and dialogue in its
work and to eliminate the selective practices and
political motivation that still lay beneath the treatment
of human rights situations. In its view, the universal
periodic review was the appropriate mechanism for
considering the human rights situation in all countries
on an equal basis.
37. Cuba reiterated its willingness to cooperate with
the Human Rights Council and the human rights
machinery of the United Nations, applied universally
and without discrimination, as well as to dialogue with
all States on a basis of mutual respect, recognition of
sovereign equality, and acknowledgement of the right
of every people to choose its own political system and
institutions.
38. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation affirmed its determination to cooperate
constructively with the Council to ensure that all
human rights were addressed fairly and with the same
degree of attention accorded to each. Forty-three years
after its monstrous occupation of the Syrian Golan,
Israel still refused to comply with United Nations
resolutions, including those of the Human Rights
Council. As the occupying Power, Israel also
obstructed the work of the Council and of fact-finding
missions seeking to provide recommendations on
protection of Palestinian civilians from its attacks;
perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity
continued to boast openly of their crimes committed
with impunity. United Nations bodies should therefore
take additional measures to investigate and prosecute
Israelis responsible for committing crimes which had
been documented and corroborated in the Report of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict. The objectivity of the report of the Human
Rights Council’s fact-finding mission on the Israeli
attack on the freedom flotilla headed for Gaza on a
humanitarian mission must also be commended.
39. Her delegation rejected all proposals calling for
changes in the agenda of the Council or for restricting
victims’ opportunities to disclose human rights abuses
that some States sought to cover up. The Council
needed to implement its resolutions urgently,
particularly those relating to the human rights situation
in Palestine and the occupied Arab territories, as the
only platform that gave voice to the victims of human
rights abuse without double standards or politicization
in a unique and long-standing situation in which racial
discrimination and human rights abuse had been
legitimized.
40. Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) said that since its
establishment, the Human Rights Council had provided
a space for dialogue, action and initiatives to promoteA/C.3/65/SR.39
7 10-61572
and protect human rights. He underscored the
important role Morocco had played in establishing its
working methods, particularly the universal periodic
review.
41. In line with General Assembly resolution 60/251,
the five-year review of the work, mission and mandate
of the Human Rights Council would soon take place.
The first session of the Intergovernmental Working
Group for the review in Geneva had focused on
calculating the efficiency of the activities of the
Council and its ability to meet chronic human rights
needs on the ground, and had reflected the converging
points of view on the most practical aspects of the
work of the Council.
42. That assessment and the conclusions drawn
would serve to reinforce the capacities of the Human
Rights Council to promote and protect human rights,
particularly in urgent situations, and improve human
rights on the ground. However, it should be
remembered that the review process was not a reform
of the Council. He called for fruitful technical
cooperation with developing countries and for more
funding to be made available so that NGOs,
particularly from countries of the South, could be
involved in the universal periodic review of their
respective countries.
43. Lastly, he commended the work of OHCHR and
the indispensable support it provided to the Human
Rights Council.
44. Ms. Rasheed (Observer for Palestine) said that
the initial findings of the Goldstone report had clearly
confirmed that Israel had committed serious human
rights violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law against the Palestinian people. In
view of those violations and the ongoing Israeli
blockade of Gaza, which had brought further hardship
to the population, the General Assembly had adopted
resolution 64/254, calling on Israel and the Palestinian
side to conduct independent and credible investigations
based on international standards into the findings of
that Goldstone report. A committee of independent
experts had been convened by the Human Rights
Council to assess any domestic legal or other
proceedings by both parties. That Committee had
confirmed that while the Palestinian Authority had
established an independent investigation commission,
which had carried out a careful and detailed inquiry,
Israel had not. The Committee had concluded in its
report (A/HRC/15/50) that Israel’s lack of cooperation
had hampered its assessment of Israel’s response to the
call to conduct independent and credible investigations
into those serious violations. Palestine called on the
international community to compel Israel to carry out
the investigations in conformity with international
standards.
45. With regard to the report prepared by the
international fact-finding mission to investigate
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, resulting from the
Israeli attacks on the flotilla of ships carrying
humanitarian assistance (A/HRC/15/21), her delegation
supported its conclusions and called for serious follow-
up by the international community, including the
Security Council, to hold the perpetrators to account
and to ensure that justice was done. She expressed her
deepest condolences to the Government of Turkey for
the loss of Turkish civilians on that humanitarian
mission.
46. Both reports confirmed the trend that Israel
flouted international law and treated the international
community with disdain, without any consequences.
She called on all Member States to fight that impunity
and to adhere to the founding principles of the United
Nations.
47. Mr. Heaton (Canada) said that his delegation
welcomed the decisions taken at the fifteenth session
of the Human Rights Council to establish two new
special procedures mandates, namely the Special
Rapporteur on the right to freedom of association and
peaceful assembly and a working group on the issue of
discrimination against women in law and in practice.
He also noted with satisfaction the examples of cross-
regional collaboration at the recent session of the
Council and hoped it would continue. He expressed his
concern at attempts to limit the independence of
OHCHR, impeding the Office in its work to advocate
all human rights in all parts of the world.
48. The upcoming five-year review of the Human
Rights Council should strengthen the role of the
Council, particularly in response to enduring and
urgent human rights situations, in preventing new
violations and in mainstreaming human rights
throughout the United Nations system. To achieve that
aim, the annual programme of work of the Council
should be more streamlined and responsive, and its
agenda should be efficient and balanced.A/C.3/65/SR.39
10-61572 8
49. His delegation remained committed to
strengthening the special procedures and the universal
periodic review, and during the review process Canada
would work with others to encourage greater
engagement of States with the special procedures and
to defend the independence of mandate holders. He
hoped that the universal periodic review procedure
would be extended and would promote the
participation of civil society and NGOs in the working
group prior to the universal periodic review. He also
called for a second cycle to be added to the process to
follow up on recommendations and to take into account
new developments.
50. Ms. Ploder (Austria), Vice-Chair, took the Chair.
51. Ms. Furman (Israel) said that her delegation was
dismayed and disappointed at the report of the Human
Rights Council and the resolutions therein. The
political nature of the Council had been demonstrated
again by the resolution adopted just two days after the
incident of 31 May involving vessels bound for the
Gaza Strip, despite a lack of information about what
had occurred. The report on the matter displayed the
same wilful ignorance, bias and disregard for
impartiality, truth or promoting human rights. Israel
was continuing to investigate the events concerning the
flotilla and would share its findings with the Secretary-
General’s panel of inquiry.
52. Half of the country-specific resolutions contained
in the report of the Human Rights Council concerned
Israel, further demonstrating its bias and lack of
impartiality. By singling out Israel in that way the
Human Rights Council had clearly violated General
Assembly resolution 60/251 and basic notions of
fairness and impartiality, undermining its credibility
and legitimacy.
53. Israel was a democracy committed to the rule of
law and human rights, with an internationally
respected, independent judiciary and a pluralist and
active civil society. It had engaged candidly and
professionally in dialogue with various United Nations
mechanisms, including the universal periodic review.
However, it could not accept a partisan report that
perpetuated a politicized agenda.
54. Mr. Kimura (Japan) said that his country had
participated actively in the work of the Human Rights
Council in the four years since its establishment.
Recognizing nevertheless that certain issues needed to
be addressed in order to improve the situation of
human rights around the world, Japan welcomed the
outcome of the first intergovernmental working group
session on the review of the Council.
55. In discussions concerning the review, it would be
necessary to consider coordination between the
Council and other United Nations bodies dealing with
human rights, such as the Third Committee, in order to
make system-wide efforts mutually reinforcing. In
addition, it would be important to determine whether
the universal periodic review mechanism and other
newly created functions of the Council were
contributing effectively to improving human rights
situations and follow-up on their outcomes. His
Government reiterated its position that the report of the
Council should be presented directly to the General
Assembly instead of the Third Committee.
56. Although leprosy was curable, misunderstanding
and ignorance of the disease continue to provide the
basis for prejudice and discrimination. To correct that
situation, Japan had contributed to the drafting of
principles and guidelines by the Council on eliminating
discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and
their families. It had also presented a draft resolution
on the subject that the Council had adopted by
consensus.
57. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) said that the
establishment of the Human Rights Council had
marked a key paradigm shift, as it had represented a
rejection of adversarial approaches to human rights
work marred by politicization and naming and
shaming, seeking instead to foster dialogue,
cooperation and mutual respect in the new institution.
Ahead of the forthcoming mandated review of the
Council, his country held the view that Member States
should reinforce its strengths — in particular, the
successful implementation of the universal periodic
review mechanism — instead of reconstructing or
reframing existing arrangements. Moreover, some
thought should be given to streamlining the Council’s
work, improving its working methods and increasing
its visibility as it matured into its intended role. With
regard to working methods, his delegation disagreed
with charges that the Council lacked the capacity to
respond to human rights situations and held that its
responsiveness had been clearly demonstrated through
the convening of numerous special sessions and urgent
debate on pressing issues.A/C.3/65/SR.39
9 10-61572
58. His delegation looked forward to the completion
of the ongoing work of the intergovernmental working
group on the review of the Council’s work. In closing,
he wished to acknowledge the contribution of
non-governmental organizations and national human
rights institutions, both of which had an increased
space to participate in the Council’s work to promote
and protect human rights. In order to ensure that the
contribution of such entities was effective, the United
Nations resolutions governing their participation
should apply.
59. Ms. Yu (Republic of Korea) said that her
delegation welcomed the two new special procedures
established by the Council. However, the Human
Rights Council needed further improvement in certain
areas: for instance, it should avoid the proliferation of
resolutions and provide strengthened cooperation to
special procedures. The Geneva review process must
be complemented by a status review in New York. She
recalled that the original purpose of the review process
had been to strengthen the international commitment to
human rights; there was a need to avoid duplication by
the Third Committee and the Council.
60. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
the Report of the Human Rights Council reflected both
the Council’s strengths and its weaknesses. The United
States was proud of many of the Council’s resolutions
on subjects including the freedom of assembly,
discrimination against women, freedom of opinion,
violence against Afghan schoolchildren, trafficking in
persons, the protection of human rights defenders and
human rights in the context of HIV/AIDS. It was
especially proud of the Council’s recent renewal of the
mandate of the independent expert for the Sudan and of
new resolutions on Kyrgyzstan and Guinea.
61. However, it remained disappointed with the
Council’s unbalanced and one-sided approach to the
situation in Israel and the Palestinian territories. That
was especially evident in its handling of the mandate
and report of Justice Richard Goldstone. Its continuing
bias was further evident in its hasty resolution
establishing a fact-finding mission with a flawed
mandate to investigate the tragic incident aboard Gaza-
bound ships in May 2010 and its resolution following
up on the mission’s report.
62. Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) welcomed the Human
Rights Council’s creation of a mandate for a Special
Rapporteur on the right to peaceful freedom of
assembly and association and its establishment of a
Working Group on discrimination against women.
63. Costa Rica placed equal value on civil, cultural,
economic, social and political rights. While not a
member of the Council, it had made efforts to
cooperate with its work and had sponsored human
rights initiatives in such areas as terrorism, indigenous
peoples, adequate housing, health, discrimination
against women, extreme poverty, contemporary forms
of slavery and arbitrary detention. It had presented on
behalf of the Platform for Human Rights Education and
Training, a draft resolution on training teachers, public
employees, security forces and military personnel. It
had also supported, along with the Maldives and
Switzerland, an initiative on human rights and the
environment.
64. The review was an opportunity to make the
Council more proactive in the promotion of human
rights, in order to improve its response capacity in
chronic and emerging situations. The tools and
mechanisms available to the Council should also be
assessed for their effectiveness. Costa Rica attached
great importance to the use of flexible tools for
country-specific situations.
65. Mr. Phuangketkeow (President of the Human
Rights Council) said that during the challenging period
of the five-year review it was important that the
Council was not distracted from its real work of
promoting and protecting human rights.
66. The success of the review, which was not a
reform of the Council, would depend on close
cooperation between the United Nations offices in
Geneva and New York. The review being carried out in
Geneva would focus on the work of the Council and
how to enhance its work and functioning within its
mandate. He and the Council members were open to all
proposals as to how that could be achieved. During the
review, many issues would be considered but it would
be guided by four overarching objectives: that the
Council should have greater impact on human rights on
the ground; that coherence between all Human Rights
Council procedures should be ensured; that the
capacity of the Council to deal constructively and
even-handedly with urgent human rights situations
should be enhanced; and that the Council’s work
should be streamlined as much as possible to maximize
time and resources.A/C.3/65/SR.39
10-61572 10
67. The review being carried out by the General
Assembly in New York would focus primarily on the
status of the Council, and was therefore distinct from
the work being done in Geneva. However, it was
important to enhance synergies between the two
procedures and to work closely, particularly in areas
where the two reviews overlapped. He looked forward
to working closely with the General Assembly and the
Third Committee during the review process.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.