United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.48
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
29 January 2013
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-61279 (E)
*1261279*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 48th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 28 November 2012, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 103: Crime prevention and criminal justice
Agenda item 131: Programme planning
Agenda item 116: Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(a) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Completion of the work of the Third CommitteeA/C.3/67/SR.48
12-61279 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.23/Rev.1: Rights of the child
1. Mr. Rivas (Uruguay), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States, the European Union, and the
other sponsors, said that Australia, Japan, Maldives,
New Zealand, Norway, Republic of Korea and Ukraine
had joined the sponsors.
2. The Chair suggested that since the document as
amended was available on the Committee’s QuickPlace
website, and since there were numerous amendments to
the text, as an exceptional procedure, an oral reading of
the amendments could be dispensed with.
3. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Angola, Armenia, Belarus, Benin, Côte d’Ivoire,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Rwanda, Swaziland,
Tajikistan, Togo, Uganda, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Zambia had joined the sponsors.
4. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.23/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
5. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that the
current version of the resolution highlighted the need
to protect the rights of indigenous children, which was
an issue of great concern in her country. Her
Government had instituted a number of laws and
programmes for the benefit Native Americans, and in
particular American Indian and Alaskan native youth.
The fact that her delegation had joined the consensus
on the draft resolution, however, did not imply that
States must become party to any instruments to which
they were not a party or implement obligations under
human rights instruments to which they were not a
party. Furthermore, to the extent that it was implied in
the resolution, the United States did not recognize the
creation of any new rights that it had not previously
recognized, the expansion of the content or coverage of
existing rights, or any other change in the current state
of treaty law or customary international law. In
particular the United States wished to recall its
previous positions on economic, social and cultural
rights, and on the topic of the right to development.
Further, she understood the reaffirmation of prior
instruments in the draft resolution to apply only to
those who had affirmed them initially. She also wished
to reiterate concerns about the budgetary implications
of the draft resolution.
6. Ms. Walker (Canada) said that her country had
made significant investments in the rights and well-
being of children and youth. The draft resolution called
attention to the rights the most vulnerable, in particular
girls, and of indigenous peoples. The United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples was
an aspirational, non-legally binding document that did
not reflect customary international law or change
Canadian law.
7. Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) said that while
her country had joined the consensus on the draft
resolution, it had refrained from its usual practice of
joining the sponsors because it disagreed with the
creation of a special rights regime for indigenous
children. Their rights were sufficiently covered by the
combination of the Convention on the Rights the Child
and the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples. The creation of separate programmes for
indigenous children, however well-intentioned, was
counterproductive. The focus should rather be on
integrating indigenous children with the other children
in their societies. She expressed concern that the
sponsors, and in particular the United States, the
European Union and the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, had taken it upon themselves to
decide on behalf of all how the interests of children
should be safeguarded, and had not, as in previous
years, taken into consideration the views of other
delegations. If that trend continued, the issue would
become politicized and the resolution would lose more
sponsors.
8. Reverend Wylie (Observer for the Holy See) said
that his delegation was disappointed that the resolution
did not include an explicit reference to the practice of
forced sterilization and forced abortion against
indigenous peoples. Inclusion of such a reference
would have been consistent with obligations regarding
the care of children before as well as after birth
contained in the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and with guarantees of the right to life, protection from
torture and equal protection under law contained in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. He reiterated
reservations previously expressed by the Holy See, and
in particular stressed that the term “sexual and
reproductive health” should not be taken to includeA/C.3/67/SR.48
3 12-61279
abortion and that “gender” should be understood to
mean male and female according to the general and
historical usage of the term.
9. The Chair suggested that the Committee should
take note, in accordance with the annex to General
Assembly decision 55/488, of the report of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child (A/67/41), and
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography
(A/67/291).
10. It was so decided.
Agenda item 67 Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.56/Rev.1: Global efforts for
the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
11. Mr. Yahiaoui (Algeria), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said
that follow-up to and implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action was central in
the fight against racism. In the years since the Durban
conference, modern technology had provided new
ways for racism to cross borders and become
globalized. Despite the consensus adoption of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the
political will had been lacking to address certain
historical injustices and issues of remedies and
reparations.
12. The draft resolution commended the Working
Group of Experts on People of African Descent, which
had worked to produce a draft programme of action for
a Decade for People of African Descent in according
with General Assembly resolution 66/144. It
encouraged continuation of the visible theme on non-
racism in football at the 2014 World Cup soccer
tournament to be held in Brazil. The draft resolution
also addressed the threats of xenophobia,
Christianophobia, Islamophobia, anti-Semitism,
cyberracism, and incitement to racial, ethnic and
religious hatred.
13. As a sign of the flexibility of the Group of 77 and
China, several amendments had been made to the text.
Paragraph 48 now read: “Encourages those States that
have not adopted legislation or other appropriate
measures which would combat and prevent advocacy
of racial, ethnic and xenophobic hatred should consider
to do so, in conformity with international standards of
freedom of expression and taking all measures
necessary to guarantee that right, taking into account
that combating the use of the Internet to propagate
racist, ethnic hatred and xenophobic content and
incitement to violence requires a multi-stakeholder
approach”. Paragraph 79 now read: “Requests the
President of the General Assembly in consultation with
Member States, relevant United Nations programmes
and agencies, and civil society including
non-governmental organizations, to launch an informal
consultative preparatory process for the proclamation
of the International Decade of People of African
Descent, with the theme, “People of African Descent:
Recognition, Justice and Development”, with a view to
proclaiming it in 2013, and requests the Secretary-
General to report to the General Assembly before the
end of the sixty-seventh session on practical steps to be
taken to make a decade effective”. Paragraph 80 should
now read: “Commends the Working Group of Experts
on People of African Descent for its work during its
tenth session and invites its Chair to participate in the
proclamation of the international decade and to report
to and engage in an interactive dialogue with the
General Assembly in that respect, under the item
“Elimination of Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance” at its sixty-
eighth session.
14. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Russian Federation had joined the sponsors.
15. Ms. Furman (Israel) said that in the course of its
3,000-year history, her nation had known the evils of
racism all too well. However, instead of fulfilling the
promise of uniting the world in the struggle against
racism, the 2001 Durban Conference had been hijacked
by a small group of States for the purpose of
demonizing and delegitimizing the State of Israel. The
majority had stood by in silence while a conference
entrusted with the mission of countering racism
became a vehicle for exactly the opposite. In the face
of the resulting hatred, anti-Semitism, intolerance andA/C.3/67/SR.48
12-61279 4
prejudice, Israel had been forced to withdraw from the
Durban Conference and to refrain from participating in
the 2009 Durban Review Conference and the 2011
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.
Although the draft resolution contained elements that
would have been positive in their own right, its core
remained the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action, which was tainted by politicization. For that
reason, her delegation was calling for a vote on the
draft resolution and would vote against it.
16. Mr. Yahiaoui (Algeria), speaking on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China, said that the primary
purpose of the draft resolution was to follow up on the
strides made by General Assembly resolution 60/144 in
laying the foundations for an International Decade for
People of African Descent. It also stressed the
imperative for the General Assembly to engage with
the Durban follow-up mechanisms in the same manner
as other special procedures and mechanisms of the
Human Rights Council addressed contemporary
manifestations of racial discrimination such as misuse
of the Internet by extremist groups, and touched on the
significant work of the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination. It stressed the importance of
mobilizing political will for achievement of the
consensus reached in Durban. He urged all delegations
to vote in favour of it.
17. Ms. Syed (Norway), speaking also on behalf of
Iceland, Liechtenstein and Switzerland, said that those
countries had entered negotiations on the draft
resolution hoping to support it as they had in previous
years. However, they were concerned about the
introduction of several new paragraphs on intolerance
and discrimination based on religion or belief. Singling
out one form of discrimination or intolerance at the
expense of others undermined the message against
racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia. Those
delegations would thus be compelled to abstain.
18. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that her
country’s opposition to racism and racial
discrimination was rooted in some of the most tragic
chapters of its history. Her delegation was concerned
about speech that advocated national, racial or
religious hatred, but remained convinced that the best
antidote to offensive speech was not bans and
punishments, but a combination of robust legal
protections against discrimination and hate crimes,
proactive government outreach to racial and religious
groups, and vigorous defence of freedom of
expression. The Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action unfairly singled out Israel and endorsed overly
broad restrictions on freedom of expression. She
regretted that the draft resolution continued to contain
elements that required her delegation to vote against it.
19. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus) speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that the European Union
remained fully committed to the principal objectives of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, but
also remained concerned about lack of implementation
and the absence of political will to ensure effective
steps towards the elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
The European Union would continue to support the
work of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance. He expressed appreciation for the
efforts of the facilitators to address some of the
European Union’s concerns, including recognition of
the positive role of freedom of expression could play in
combating racism, and the need to address advocacy of
racial, ethnic and xenophobic hatred in conformity
with international standards on freedom of expression.
He welcomed the request to the President of the
General Assembly to launch a preparatory process for
the proclamation of the Decade for People of African
Descent. However, the European Union could not
support the addition of several paragraphs on religious
intolerance in a draft resolution that was supposed to
be about racism. There was a slight but significant
distinction between criticizing people for what they
believed and criticizing people for what they were.
Religion and belief were identities of choice, whereas
race and ethnicity were not. Of particular concern was
the wording of the twenty-first preambular paragraph,
which suggested that religious intolerance was
primarily a problem among nations rather than a
problem at the national and local levels. The European
Union would have liked to see a clear recognition in
the text that the primary responsibility for combating
racism lay with States. A shorter and more focused text
would have served better to unite the international
community against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. The Member
States of the European Union looked forward to more
productive negotiations on those issues in the coming
year, but could not support the draft resolution as it
was currently written.A/C.3/67/SR.48
5 12-61279
20. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/L.56/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Israel,
Marshall Islands, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
21. Draft resolution A/C.3/L.56/Rev.1 was adopted by
126 votes to 6, with 47 abstentions.*
22. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) said that it was
important to maintain a balance among all the elements
of the Durban agenda. The proclamation of an
International Decade of People of African Descent was
particularly relevant to his country and the countries of
the Caribbean.
23. Mr. Červenka (Czech Republic) said that his
delegation had reservations concerning the declaration
issued by the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action. While those documents were relevant tools in
combating racism, the Czech Republic had not
participated in the commemoration owing to the
manifestations of racism that had marred the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in 2001.
24. Moreover, his delegation held that all victims of
racism should be treated equally regardless of the form
of discrimination from which they suffered. For that
reason, it was sceptical concerning the proclamation of
a Decade for People of African Descent. Were people
of Asian descent, the Roma, indigenous people and
many others not subject to racial discrimination and
intolerance, and were their grievances not worthy of
the same attention?
25. Lastly, while international cooperation was
crucial in combating racism, the primary responsibility
lay with States, regardless of how much international
assistance they might receive. The draft resolution
failed to strike the right balance and did not do justice
to the issue as a whole. Therefore, while his delegation
would remain engaged in efforts to eradicate racism, it
had voted against the draft resolution.
26. The Chair suggested that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488, the Committee
should take note of the report of the Secretary-General
* The delegation of Uganda subsequently informed the
Committee that it had intended to vote in favour of the
draft resolution.A/C.3/67/SR.48
12-61279 6
on global efforts for the total elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of
and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action (A/67/325) and the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the interim report of the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (A/67/326).
27. It was so decided.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.40/Rev.1: Protection of
migrants
28. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
29. Ms. Diaz Gras (Mexico), introducing the draft
resolution, said that it reaffirmed the universal nature
of human rights, which States were obligated to respect
regardless of a person’s migrant status. The High-level
Dialogue on International Migration and Development
to be held in 2013 would afford an opportunity for
Member States to send a message regarding their
commitment to the issue of migration and to assess the
progress achieved, including on human rights, in the
seven years since the first such dialogue.
30. The delegations of Brazil, Peru and Portugal had
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
31. Reading out oral amendments to the draft
resolution, she said that, in the eighteenth preambular
paragraph, the phrase “on countries of origin and
destination” should be deleted from the third line and
the phrase “in countries of origin and destination”
should be inserted in the second line after the word
“development”. The phrase “to implement gender-
sensitive policies and programmes for women migrant
workers” in paragraph 5(d) should be moved to
paragraph 5(e). In paragraph 10(b), the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights should be added
to the list of mandate holders whose contributions were
recognized. Lastly, in paragraph 11, the phrase “all
relevant international meetings, including the High-
level Dialogue to be held in 2013” should be replaced
by “the High-level Dialogue to be held in 2013 and
other relevant international meetings”.
32. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Burkina
Faso, Egypt, Nicaragua, the Philippines, Tunisia and
Uganda had joined the sponsors.
33. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.40/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.41: Promotion of peace as
a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of all human
rights by all
34. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
35. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria, Brazil, China, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Jordan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nigeria, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Somalia, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Turkmenistan had joined the sponsors.
36. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution, said that Bangladesh, Benin, Burundi,
Cameroon, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, El Salvador,
Grenada, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jamaica,
Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Niger, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, Swaziland, Vanuatu, Viet Nam and
Zimbabwe had also joined the sponsors.
37. The draft resolution underscored the right to
peace and the need for States to promote and preserve
peace as the only means of ensuring the enjoyment of
human rights by all.
38. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Angola and Senegal had also joined the sponsors.
39. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that the member States of
the European Union were committed to human rights,
democracy and the rule of law and to international
peace and security. His delegation shared the view that
there were links between peace and respect for human
rights; however, the absence of peace could not justify
a failure to respect human rights. The draft resolution
elaborated only on the obligations and relations among
States in promoting peace without mentioning the
fundamental obligation of the State towards its citizensA/C.3/67/SR.48
7 12-61279
and thus neglected an important component of the
mandates of the Committee and the Human Rights
Council.
40. The Human Rights Council’s decision to establish
a working group to negotiate a draft resolution on the
right to peace, which was welcomed in the draft
resolution, had been controversial. There was no
international consensus that the right to peace existed
in international law and the draft resolution was
potentially inconsistent with other international norms,
including the Charter. Moreover, the draft declaration
on the right to peace drawn up by the advisory group of
the Human Rights Council was not a suitable starting
point for the discussions of its intergovernmental
working group and therefore the European Union did
not support the Council’s decision to establish that
group. For those reasons its members would vote
against the draft resolution.
41. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that,
like all peace-loving nations, the United States was
concerned whenever conflict erupted and human rights
were violated and knew that peace was unstable where
citizens were denied the right to speak freely, worship
as they pleased, choose their own leaders or assemble
without fear. Her Government would continue to work
on issues that the draft resolution was purported to
advance, such as women’s rights, disarmament and
development, through action in the appropriate United
Nations body, utilizing subject-matter expertise and
building on years of diligent efforts.
42. Her delegation was concerned, however, that the
draft resolution did not serve its stated purpose of
promoting peace and would vote against it. For
example, it disagreed with the language in the text that
welcomed the decision of the Human Rights Council in
its resolution 20/15 to establish an intergovernmental
working group. That resolution contemplated that the
working group would draft a declaration covering
many issues that were at best unrelated to the cause of
peace and at worst divisive and detrimental to efforts to
achieve peace.
43. The Committee could make the greatest
contribution to peace by focusing on the
implementation of human rights obligations. Human
rights were universal and were enjoyed by individuals;
there was not, as suggested by the draft resolution, a
collective right to peace. Furthermore, the text
contained other incomplete characterizations of
international law, including with respect to the use of
force. While no country wished to be cast as voting
against peace, her delegation would vote against the
draft resolution, which would not contribute to the
cause of peace or human rights.
44. At the request of the representative of Cyprus a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.41.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,A/C.3/67/SR.48
12-61279 8
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Armenia, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, Singapore.
45. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.41 was adopted by
121 votes to 53, with 5 abstentions.*
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.42/Rev.1: The right to food
46. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
47. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution, said that Afghanistan, Armenia,
Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Botswana, Cambodia, Central African Republic,
Cyprus, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Finland, France,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea Bissau, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta,
Mexico, Nauru, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, the Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkey, Vanuatu and Yemen had joined the
sponsors.
48. The full enjoyment of the right to food remained
a utopia for many, despite its recognition in human
rights instruments and declarations. The food crisis had
caused a dramatic increase in the number of people
suffering from hunger — currently estimated at over
870 million — most of whom lived in developing
countries. The draft resolution called upon the United
Nations funds and programmes, the international
financial institutions and States to take the necessary
measures to end the food crisis, ensure food security
and guarantee everyone the right to food.
49. Reading out amendments to the text, she said that
in the twelfth preambular paragraph the word
“massive” had been replaced with the word
“substantive”. An additional preambular paragraph had
been added after the fifteenth preambular paragraph
that read: “Recalling the adoption of the voluntary
guiding principles during the thirty-eighth session of
the Committee on World Food Security and the 144th
session of the Council of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations in May 2012”.
After paragraph 9, a new paragraph had been added
that read, “Calls upon all States and, if appropriate,
relevant international organizations to take measures
and support programmes which are aimed at combating
under-nutrition in mothers and children and the
reversible effects of chronic undernutrition in early
childhood, in particular from pregnancy to the age of
two years”. Lastly, the words “as well as
non-communicable diseases” had been added at the end
of paragraph 24.
50. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Andorra, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Congo, Croatia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Egypt, Japan, Lithuania, Mali, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Paraguay, the Republic of Moldova, San
Marino, Serbia, South Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and
Zambia had joined the sponsors.
51. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.42/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
Explanations of position after adoption of the draft
resolution
52. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that her
delegation was pleased to join the consensus on the
draft resolution. Her Government was committed to
accelerating progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals and boosting agricultural
development in order to achieve the Goals related to
poverty and hunger.
53. While the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations had issued warnings about high
food prices and price volatility, it had stated that the
current situation did not constitute a food crisis.
Furthermore, while the draft resolution identified
* The delegations of Ethiopia and Turkmenistan
subsequently said that they had intended to vote in favour
of the draft resolution.A/C.3/67/SR.48
9 12-61279
factors that contributed to food insecurity, it omitted
the significant role of conflict and lack of good
governance as causes of food insecurity.
54. There was indeed a chronic food security crisis in
the Horn of Africa, where nearly 8.2 million people
experienced food insecurity. Her Government had
provided over $1.3 billion in humanitarian assistance
to that region and supported the right of everyone to an
adequate standard of living as recognized in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
55. The United States was not a party to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights; joining consensus on the draft
resolution did not recognize any change in the current
state of conventional or customary international law
regarding rights related to food. While the goal was to
ensure that everyone had adequate access to food, the
right to food was not an enforceable obligation. The
references in the draft resolution to the right to food
were interpreted in the light of article 2, paragraph 1,
of the Covenant, in which the States parties undertook
to progressively achieve the full realization of
economic, social and cultural rights to the extent they
had assumed such obligations. While her Government
was the world’s largest food aid donor, it did not
concur with any reading of the draft resolution that
would suggest that States had particular extraterritorial
obligations arising from the right to food.
56. While her delegation joined in welcoming the
work of the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, including its general comment No. 12,
it had significant disagreements with some portions of
the general comment. The reaffirmation of previous
documents was interpreted as applicable to the extent
that States had already affirmed those documents. Her
delegation did not necessarily agree with statements of
a technical or scientific nature without attribution in
the draft resolution.
57. The United States was committed to international
trade liberalization and achieving a balanced
conclusion to the Doha Round, which would help open
markets and thereby generate economic growth that
would spur development. The draft resolution would in
no way undermine or modify commitments to existing
trade agreements or the mandates of ongoing trade
negotiations.
58. The implementation of the World Trade
Organization (WTO) agreement on trade-related
Aspects of intellectual property rights (TRIPS)
supported comprehensive approaches to food security
by encouraging policies that would enable countries to
use tools and incentives, including biotechnology, to
raise agricultural productivity. By joining the
consensus on the draft resolution the United States
supported the continued implementation of the TRIPS
agreement, which provided for patent and plant variety
protection systems that contributed to the efforts to
promote global food security.
59. Lastly, she reiterated her delegation’s views on
the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, “The future
we want”, which had been conveyed to the Secretary-
General of the Conference in July 2012.
60. Ms. Walker (Canada) said that her delegation
had concerns with some aspects of the draft resolution.
The TRIPS agreement contained no reference to the
concepts of food security and the right to food. Her
delegation interpreted paragraph 29 of the draft
resolution to mean that it encouraged WTO members to
consider the manner in which they implemented TRIPS
but did not suggest that Member States should make
substantive interpretations of the TRIPS agreement or
instruct WTO members on how to implement the
agreement. Her Government saw nothing in the
agreement that prevented States from pursuing the
right to food or food security. Canada supported the
progressive realization of the right to food as part of
the right to an adequate standard of living.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.43: Promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order
61. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
62. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria, Brazil, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Myanmar, Namibia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Somalia, South Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic and Viet Nam had become sponsors.A/C.3/67/SR.48
12-61279 10
63. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution, said that Bangladesh, Benin, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Comoros, the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Ghana, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Lesotho, Malaysia, Malawi, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Senegal, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Swaziland, Vanuatu and
Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors.
64. The draft resolution requested the Secretary-
General and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to support, and Governments to
cooperate with, the Independent Expert on the
promotion of a democratic and equitable international
order in the discharge of his mandate.
65. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Armenia had also joined the sponsors.
66. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union in explanation of vote before
the voting, said that it was necessary to work towards a
democratic and equitable international order and the
issues raised in the draft resolution required careful
analysis and action by all nations. The European Union
had been founded on a determination to promote peace
and stability and to build a world based on respect for
human rights, democracy and the rule of law. However,
the member States of the European Union remained of
the view that many elements of the draft resolution
extended far beyond the scope of the United Nations
human rights agenda and therefore they would vote
against it.
67. At the request of the representative of Cyprus, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.43.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico,
Mozambique, Peru, Samoa.
68. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.43 was adopted by
121 votes to 52, with 7 abstentions.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.46: Missing persons
69. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
70. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Benin, Chile, Côte
d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia, Guatemala,
Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar,
Nigeria, Panama, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia,A/C.3/67/SR.48
11 12-61279
South Sudan, Tunisia and Uganda had joined the
sponsors.
71. Mr. Mikayilli (Azerbaijan), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Montenegro, New Zealand,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Netherlands, Qatar, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia,
Spain, the former Yugoslav of Macedonia had also
joined the sponsors.
72. The draft resolution called on States to take
measures to prevent persons from going missing during
armed conflict, reaffirmed the right of families to know
the fate of their missing relatives and invited States to
maintain accessible archives on missing persons and
unidentified remains.
73. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Paraguay, Uruguay and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had joined the
sponsors.
74. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.46 was adopted.
Agenda item 103: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.18/Rev.1: Preventing and
combating corrupt practices and the transfer of
proceeds of corruption, facilitating asset recovery and
returning such assets to legitimate owners, in particular
to countries of origin, in accordance with the United
Nations Convention against Corruption
75. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
76. Ms. Duarte (Colombia), introducing the draft
resolution, said that it called for the strengthening of
institutions and public policies in order to combat
corruption and ensure the return of assets.
77. Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Israel,
Mexico, the Philippines, the Russian Federation,
Turkey, Ukraine and the United States of America had
joined the sponsors.
78. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that, in addition, Armenia, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador,
Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania, Mongolia, Morocco, Nigeria,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Senegal, South
Sudan, Thailand, Tunisia, Ukraine and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela had joined the sponsors.
79. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.18/Rev.1 was adopted.
80. Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein) said that his
delegation had hoped that the draft resolution would
take a comprehensive approach to combating
corruption, including the petty corruption that led to
restrictions on the exercise of fundamental rights and
freedoms by millions of people. The draft resolution
lacked balance and contained selective references to
otherwise balanced instruments such as the United
Nations Convention against Corruption. His
delegation’s efforts to improve the text had been
unsuccessful to such an extent that it no longer
considered the Third Committee the appropriate forum
in which to adopt the draft resolution. It had joined
consensus in the hope that substantive improvements
would be possible in the future.
81. Mr. Meier (Switzerland), speaking also on behalf
of Norway, said that it was regrettable that the
transparency and inclusiveness of the review
mechanism of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption were not properly addressed in the draft
resolution, as transparency was crucial for the effective
implementation of the Convention. An inclusive
mechanism was also crucial; it was therefore
regrettable that important stakeholders such as civil
society organizations were not permitted to participate
in the review mechanism and working groups of the
Conference of the States Parties to the Convention.
82. The Chair said that, in accordance with General
Assembly decision 55/488, the Committee should take
note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
follow-up to the Twelfth United Nations Congress on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and
preparations for the Thirteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
(A/67/97) and the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Conference of the States
Parties to the United Nations Convention against
Corruption on its fourth session (A/67/218).
83. It was so decided.A/C.3/67/SR.48
12-61279 12
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.35: Committee on the
Rights of the Child
84. The Chair drew the attention to the statement of
programme budget implications contained in document
A/C.3/67/L.69.
85. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Argentina, Armenia, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Denmark,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
Italy, Jordan, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Montenegro,
Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, the
Republic of Korea, Serbia, South Sudan, Sweden,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Uruguay and Zambia had joined the sponsors.
86. Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Albania, Brazil, Bulgaria, Finland,
France, Honduras, Ireland, Israel, Liberia,
Luxembourg, Malta, Peru, Poland, Senegal, Slovakia,
Switzerland, the United Republic of Tanzania and Togo
had joined the sponsors.
87. The purpose of the draft resolution was to allow
the Committee on the Rights of the Child to meet in
parallel chambers during one of its pre-session working
group meetings and one of its regular sessions in order
to address a backlog in the review of reports by States
parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Similar measures had been taken on two previous
occasions. A sustainable solution to the backlog in the
review of reports presented to the treaty bodies should
be found in the context of the intergovernmental
process of the Assembly on strengthening the
functioning of the human rights treaty body system. In
the meantime, measures should be taken that would
enable those bodies to conduct their business. The draft
resolution represented a compromise among the
different positions on the matter.
88. Reading out oral amendments, he said that in the
fourth preambular paragraph the word “number”
should be replaced by the word “backlog” and the
words “awaiting review by the Committee” should be
added after the word “Protocols”. In paragraph 1, the
word “continue” should be replaced by “build upon”.
In paragraph 3, after the phrase “Decides to authorize
the Committee”, the phrase “recognizing that such a
temporary measure is not a long-term solution to the
backlog and” should be added. In addition, a fourth
operative paragraph should be added that read, “Invites
States parties to adhere to the page limit established by
the Committee for reports of States parties and notes
that this should reduce the operating costs of the
Committee”.
89. In recognition of the current difficult financial
situation, the draft resolution contained a modest
proposal compared to the actual requirements of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child. While a number
of common core documents had been removed from
the proposal in order to reduce the costs, there had
been insufficient time to issue a revised statement of
programme budget implications. Therefore an
additional amendment had been made so that the
financial implications could be addressed within the
regular budget cycle for the biennium 2014-2015.
Accordingly, in paragraph 3, the year “2013” should be
changed to “2014”, and the year “2014” should be
changed to “2015”.
90. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that, in view of the amendments read out, the statement
of programme budget implications (A/C.3/67/L.69)
was withdrawn.
91. In addition, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Burkina Faso,
Cyprus, the Dominican Republic, Lebanon, Lithuania,
Madagascar, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Portugal, Tunisia and Ukraine had joined the sponsors.
92. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.35, as orally
amended, was adopted.
93. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) welcomed
the consensus on the draft resolution. His delegation
did not interpret paragraph 4 as having any impact on
the intergovernmental process of the Assembly for
strengthening the functioning of the human rights
treaty body system, as the question of page limits was
one of the issues to be discussed during that process.
94. Mr. Hisajima (Japan) said that his delegation had
joined the consensus on the draft resolution out of
concern at the large backlog of reports to be reviewed
by the Committee on the Rights of the Child. He was
concerned, however, that the draft resolution wouldA/C.3/67/SR.48
13 12-61279
entail programme budget implications despite the oral
amendment made to paragraph 3. It was regrettable
that the draft resolution had been introduced late in the
session, leaving little time for negotiation of the text.
OHCHR should make further efforts to reduce costs,
including by reducing the volume of core documents. It
was his delegation’s position that the measures set out
in the draft resolution were temporary and exceptional
and that a long-term solution should be sought.
95. Ms. Walker (United Kingdom) said that her
delegation could not join the consensus on the draft
resolution, which would not solve the problem of the
backlog facing the Committee on the Rights of the
Child. The High Commissioner for Human Rights had
recognized the limitations of such ad hoc solutions in
her June 2012 report on strengthening the human rights
treaty body system.
96. Her delegation regretted the fact that the late
presentation of the draft resolution had prevented
discussion of its concerns over the Committee on the
Rights of Child meeting in parallel chambers and the
programme budget implications. It was disappointed
that compromise proposals which would have
addressed its reservations regarding costs had not been
accepted. The Committee’s efforts should be focused
on the wider process of strengthening the treaty body
system rather than on expensive ad hoc measures.
97. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that her
delegation could not join the consensus on the draft
resolution, which would lead to the Committee on the
Rights of the Child holding additional meetings to
reduce the backlog of reports. In the current economic
climate, financial constraints should be respected. Her
delegation recognized the need to make the treaty
bodies more effective through the treaty body
strengthening process.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.47: Combating intolerance,
negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination,
incitement to violence and violence against persons,
based on religion or belief
98. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
99. Mr. Al-Yafei (United Arab Emirates), speaking
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), introduced a number of amendments to the draft
resolution: the fifth and ninth preambular paragraphs
had been merged; in the fifteenth preambular
paragraph, the words “deeply alarmed” had been
replaced by “expressing deep concern” and the words
“many parts of” had been deleted. In the sixteenth
preambular paragraph, the words “and violence among
individuals composing different nations” had been
deleted and replaced by “among individuals within and
from different nations”, and the words “have serious
implications for international peace and security” had
been replaced by “that may have serious implications
at the national, regional and international levels”; in
the nineteenth preambular paragraph, the words “or
beliefs” had been inserted after “and religions”; in the
twenty-first preambular paragraph, the word
“established” had been inserted before “on the basis
of”; in the twenty-second preambular paragraph, the
text from the start of the fourth line to the end had been
deleted and replaced by “and including the launching
of the Istanbul Process and taking note of the
high-level conference held in Tirana, Albania, on
8 and 9 November 2012 under the theme ‘United in
diversity’, of Albanian chairmanship of the Council of
Europe and the holding of five regional workshops by
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in Kenya, Chile, Austria, Thailand and Morocco
on related issues”; in paragraph 1, the words “on steps
taken by States” had been inserted before “on
combating intolerance”; in paragraph 2, the words
“Government officials” had been replaced by
“Governments”; in paragraph 3, the words “for
international peace and security” had been replaced by
“at the national, regional and international levels”; in
paragraph 6, the words “also recognizes the strong
need for global awareness about the dangerous
implications for international peace and security of
incitement to discrimination and violence based on
hate-oriented speech and expression” should be deleted
and replaced by “recognizes further the strong need for
global awareness about the possible serious
implications of incitement to discrimination and
violence based on religion or belief that may have
serious implications at the national, regional and
international levels”; in paragraph 7, a comma should
be inserted after the word “Cooperation”.
100. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Australia, Brazil, New Zealand, Thailand and
Uruguay had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
101. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union in explanation of position, said
that the draft resolution was a call for States to respondA/C.3/67/SR.48
12-61279 14
to acts of intolerance on the basis of international law.
The European Union would continue to condemn
violence based on religion and the advocacy of
religious hatred to incite discrimination, but expressed
its strong attachment to freedom of expression.
Freedom of religion was linked to freedom of
expression and other human rights which contributed
to democratic societies. The international community
should consolidate its response to those who sought to
use religion to fuel extremism.
102. While dialogue was invaluable, those
participating in it were individuals; a reference in the
draft resolution to a more inclusive concept of
diversity, noting that each individual had multiple
sources of identity, would therefore have been
desirable. An effective fight against intolerance called
for all aspects of identity to be taken into account, as
stated in the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization Universal (UNESCO)
Declaration on Cultural Diversity. Such diversity
should not be invoked in order to infringe human
rights.
103. As stated in the draft resolution, religious hatred
was primarily a threat to individual freedoms at the
local and national levels, and States and local
authorities were thus primarily responsible for
combating intolerance and safeguarding individual
rights. Such an approach, however, tended to highlight
divisions rather than points in common, in particular
the universal right to freedom of belief. The European
Union shared the contention that intolerance also had
an international dimension and underlined the
importance of international cooperation. It was for
States, however, to make it clear that individual acts of
intolerance did not reflect the views of peoples or
Governments.
104. The European Union condemned attacks on
religious sites, but it was the protection of individual
rights which should be the focus of the international
community’s attention. All States should implement
their obligations to protect individuals against
discrimination on the basis of their religion. In
particular, individuals should enjoy freedom of worship
without fear of intolerance and attacks.
105. Although the draft resolution referred to the King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz International Centre for
Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue in Vienna, his
delegation believed that other such centres and other
relevant initiatives, such as those of UNESCO, the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and the Anna
Lindh Foundation, should be acknowledged. On the
understanding that those comments would be reflected
in the following year’s draft resolution, the Member
States of the European Union were able to join the
consensus.
106. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.47, as orally revised,
was adopted.
107. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that her
delegation welcomed the adoption by consensus of the
draft resolution, which rejected broad speech
restrictions and supported actions which addressed
religious intolerance without limiting the freedoms of
expression and religion. It was pleased by the support
for the Istanbul Process to promote implementation of
Human Rights Council resolution 16/18, which was the
common way forward in combating intolerance.
Although parts of article 19 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights were cited in
the draft resolution, her delegation believed that the
article should be read as a whole and provided broad
protection of freedom of expression.
108. Her delegation drew attention to the December
2011 expert-level meeting on the implementation of
Human Rights Council resolution 16/18 and looked
forward to the next such meeting, to be held in
December 2012. It would continue to work to
implement the measures called for in that resolution,
including speaking out against intolerance,
encouraging the training of Government officials and
fostering religious freedom and pluralism.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.48: Freedom of religion
or belief
109. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
110. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that Australia, Chile,
Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Japan,
Madagascar, Monaco, New Zealand, Paraguay, the
Republic of Korea, Thailand and Ukraine had joined
the sponsors. He introduced the following oral
amendments to the draft resolution: the text of the
eighth preambular paragraph from the words “and
against” to the end should be deleted; paragraph 11 (f)
should be deleted; the text of paragraph 17 from “in
particular” to the end should be deleted. The EuropeanA/C.3/67/SR.48
15 12-61279
Union was confident that the resolution would be
adopted by consensus, thus sending a strong message
of unity to the world.
111. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Lebanon and Papua
New Guinea had joined the sponsors.
112. Ms. Vadiati (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
new human rights challenges were constantly emerging
because of cultural intolerance, double standards and
hegemonic political, economic and cultural ambitions.
Recent dangerous trends stemming from a sense of
cultural superiority and malicious intentions had
denigrated religions and harmed human rights.
113. Certain individuals, misinterpreting human rights
concepts, had insulted Islam and hurt the feelings of
followers of other religions by releasing a film
mocking the Prophet Muhammad, an act which
constituted irresponsible use of the right to freedom of
expression, which carried with it duties and
responsibilities under international law. As part of an
ongoing anti-Muslim campaign which, if continued,
would help normalize intolerance and legitimize
discriminatory practices, the film would incite
religious hatred. The situation reaffirmed the need for
all States to meet their obligations to prohibit
incitement to discrimination. Overcoming the problem
would require action from the international community
through the United Nations. Acts such as the release of
the film, which eroded the momentum of initiatives
including the dialogue among religions and cultures,
should be prevented. The international commitment to
tolerance and understanding therefore needed to be
renewed.
114. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.48, as orally revised,
was adopted.
115. Ms. Sucuoğlu (Turkey) said that her delegation
welcomed the adoption by consensus of the draft
resolution, but had been unable to join the sponsors
because of its position on the question of Cyprus.
116. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus) said that his
delegation regretted that rather than focusing on the
substance of the debate the Turkish delegation had
chosen to politicize the work of the Committee and had
attempted to distract it from the matter at hand. His
delegation reaffirmed that as a sovereign country
Cyprus participated in the work of the United Nations
and, like any Member State, introduced draft
resolutions on matters of importance, including while it
held the Presidency of the Council of the European
Union.
117. The Chair proposed that the Committee should
take note, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 55/488, of the report of the Human Rights
Committee (A/67/40 (vols. I and II)), the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Voluntary
Fund for Victims of Torture (A/67/264), the report of
the Secretary-General on the status of the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms
of Slavery (A/67/269), the note by the Secretary-
General transmitting the report of the Chair of the
human rights treaty bodies on their twenty-fourth
meeting (A/67/222), the report of the Secretary-
General on the right to development (A/67/159), the
report of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances
(A/67/56), the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the independent expert on
minority issues (A/67/293), the note by the Secretary-
General transmitting the report of the Working Group
on the issue of human rights and transnational
corporations and other business enterprises (A/67/285),
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of the Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural
rights (A/67/287), the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism (A/67/396), the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders
(A/67/292), the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
human rights of internally displaced persons
(A/67/289), the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the independent expert on the
effects of foreign debt and other related international
financial obligations of States on the full enjoyment of
all human rights, particularly economic, social and
cultural rights (A/67/304), the note by the Secretary-
General transmitting the report of the Special
Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the
right to an adequate standard of living and on the right
to non-discrimination in this context (A/67/286), the
note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Special Rapporteur on the right to education
(A/67/310), the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-recurrence (A/67/368), the note by theA/C.3/67/SR.48
12-61279 16
Secretariat on the report of the Working Group on the
Right to Development on its thirteenth session
(A/67/178), the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
independence of judges and lawyers (A/67/305), the
note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health (A/67/302), the report of
the Secretary-General on the Khmer Rouge Trials
(A/67/380), the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression (A/67/357) and the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 (A/67/379).
118. It was so decided.
The meeting was suspended at 7.10 p.m. and resumed at
7.35 p.m.
Agenda item 131: Programme planning (continued)
Draft decision A/C.3/67/L.73: Programme 20, Human
rights, of the proposed strategic framework for the
period 2014-2015
119. Mr. De León Huerta (Mexico), introducing the
draft decision, said that while it had been impossible to
accommodate all of the proposals made by delegations,
the text was broadly representative of their views.
120. Mr. Mendonça (Cape Verde) speaking on behalf
of the Group of African States, said that the promotion
and protection of human rights was a core mandate of
the United Nations. The strategic framework contained
in the draft decision reflected a balance of the views
put forward during the negotiations and charted the
way forward for OHCHR. The Group particularly
welcomed the sections on the right to development, the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
capacity development and technical cooperation. While
the Group would prefer to have seen more of its
proposals reflected in the document, it nevertheless
endorsed the draft decision.
121. Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago), speaking
on behalf of the Caribbean Community, said that it was
unfortunate that consensus had not been achieved on a
text that struck a good balance. While the text might
not be entirely satisfactory to all delegations, it
reflected the best possible compromise. The proposed
strategic framework would enable the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to implement
her mandates relating to the right to development and
the follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, which were especially important
for developing countries.
122. At the request of the representative of Israel, a
recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain andA/C.3/67/SR.48
17 12-61279
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Canada, Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Australia, Belarus, Cambodia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Samoa, Syrian Arab
Republic.
123. Draft decision A/C.3/67/L.73 was adopted by 161
votes to 3, with 7 abstentions.
Statements in explanation of vote after the voting
124. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that it was regrettable that
the Committee for Programme and Coordination had
been unable to agree by consensus on the proposed
strategic framework submitted to it at its fifty-second
session. Nevertheless, the overall balance achieved in
the draft decision by negotiation constituted a solid
basis for the work of OHCHR in the biennium 2014-
2015 and therefore the member States of the European
Union had voted in favour of it. It would have been
preferable for the draft decision to be adopted by
consensus; he expressed the hope that in future the
Committee for Programme and Coordination would
reach agreement on programme 20, Human rights, of
the proposed strategic framework.
125. Ms. Furman (Israel) said that her delegation had
had reservations concerning the reference in the draft
decision to the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance. The text contained no reference to other
high-level meetings that were important to the work of
OHCHR. Some paragraphs of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action were politicized and should
have been omitted. However, aware of the importance
of the Conference to some delegations, she had not
requested that the reference be deleted but merely that
the follow-up should focus on the relevant provisions
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.
Her delegation also objected to the reference to Human
Rights Council resolution 19/17. Many States had had
concerns about the text of the draft decision and those
concerns had been taken into consideration; it was
regrettable that the same flexibility had not been shown
in respect of Israel’s concerns. For those reasons, her
delegation had voted against the draft decision.
126. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
his delegation had voted in favour of the draft decision
because it outlined the aims and tasks of OHCHR for
the near future. While the document was not perfect, it
represented a balance that was the best possible
outcome achievable.
127. OHCHR should strictly abide by General
Assembly resolutions 48/141 and 60/251. The main
focus of its activities should be to encourage and
enhance mechanisms of dialogue and cooperation
among States rather than to strengthen monitoring.
128. Ms. Hewanpola (Australia) said that it was
disappointing that the Committee had been unable to
reach consensus on the important question of
programme planning. It was regrettable that the draft
decision contained prescriptive language relating to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.
However, Australia’s concerns on that point did not
alter its view that OHCHR did excellent work in
promoting and protecting human rights.
129. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) said that the
document, albeit imperfect, represented the views of
the majority of delegations. He had expected that
consensus would be reached, considering that most of
the parts to which delegations objected had been
agreed on in 2010. The draft decision provided
OHCHR with all necessary guidance for its future
work.
130. Mr. Han Qing (China) expressed concern that
many of his delegation’s proposals had not been
reflected in the draft decision. OHCHR should strictly
adhere to its mandate, uphold the principles of
impartiality, objectivity and non-selectivity and
enhance the promotion of economic, social and cultural
rights alongside civil and political rights. The Office
should respect the sovereignty and historical and
cultural situations of Member States and the human
rights development paths they had chosen. In addition,
it should promote dialogue and cooperation in
international human rights forums.
131. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that her
delegation was disappointed that consensus had not
been achieved and that it had deemed it necessary to
vote against the draft decision. Despite its conviction
that the promotion and protection of human rights wereA/C.3/67/SR.48
12-61279 18
among the most important functions of the United
Nations, it could not agree to language instructing
OHCHR to prioritize the implementation of follow-up
to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.
Although that document had some useful elements, her
Government’s objections to the Durban process and
outcome document were well known.
132. Furthermore, the United States was committed to
finding ways of making the right to development a
uniting rather than a divisive issue. Theoretical work
was needed in order to define that right; discussion
should focus on aspects of development relating to
universal individual rights that were guaranteed by
Governments. The attention given to the issue in a
document pertaining to OHCHR, an agency charged
with the protection of all human rights, was
inappropriate.
133. She also objected to the characterization of
General Assembly and Human Rights Council
resolutions and decisions as “legislative mandates” as
those bodies were not legislatures and their resolutions
and decisions were not binding.
134. The independence of OHCHR was crucial, as it
enabled the Office to address human rights issues
without fear of reprisal or interference by Governments
that wished to avoid scrutiny.
135. Ms. Loew (Switzerland), speaking also on behalf
of Liechtenstein and Norway, said that those
delegations had voted in favour of the draft decision
and found it regrettable that a consensus had not been
achieved. It was unfortunate that the Committee for
Programme and Coordination had been unable to agree
on the strategic framework, a balanced text that had
served well over the previous biennium as the
framework for the activities of OHCHR. Noting that
the independence of the Office was crucial to the
discharge of its mandate, she expressed the hope that in
future the strategic framework would be adopted by the
Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Agenda item 116: Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly
Draft proposal A/C.3/67/L.72
136. The Chair drew attention to the Committee’s
tentative programme of work for the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly as contained in
document A/C.3/67/L.72. He would take it that the
Committee wished to adopt the tentative programme of
work and transmit it to the General Assembly for
approval.
137. It was so decided.
Agenda item 27: Social development
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
138. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the oral statement of programme budget
implications submitted to the Committee prior to the
adoption of draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.10/Rev.1 on
realizing the Millennium Development Goals and other
internationally agreed development goals for persons
with disabilities towards 2015 and beyond had been
withdrawn.
139. Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines) said that he
welcomed the withdrawal of the oral statement of
programme budget implications. As the main sponsor
of the draft resolution, his delegation had consulted the
Secretariat during the negotiations and had been
informed that there would be no programme budget
implications; the oral statement had therefore come as
a surprise. He expressed the hope that the situation
would never recur in which a Main Committee had to
take a decision based on incorrect information.
Completion of the work of the Third Committee
140. The Chair said that he wished to thank all the
facilitators for their hard work and the delegates for
their cooperation. He declared that the Third
Committee had completed its work for the main part of
the sixty-seventh session.
The meeting rose at 8.30 p.m.