United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.21
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
18 November 2010
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-59223 (E)
*1059223*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 21st meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 19 October 2010, at 3 p.m.
Chairperson: Ms. Ploder (Vice-Chairperson) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Austria)
Contents
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of ActionA/C.3/65/SR.21
10-59223 2
In the absence of Mr. Monthe (Cameroon),
Ms. Ploder (Austria), Vice-Chairperson, took
the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/65/L.17-L.20)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.17: Intensification of
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women
1. Mr. Mijnarends (Netherlands) speaking also on
behalf of France, introduced draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.17. Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Monaco and
Montenegro had joined the sponsors. China had been
listed in error as a sponsor, but it was hoped that
eventually it would support the draft resolution. The
draft resolution was a follow-up to previous resolutions
on the agenda item and would be submitted every two
years to improve overall coherence and cooperation
between relevant actors to address all forms of
violence against women. In that regard, the
Netherlands and France welcomed the establishment of
UN Women and believed that upon its adoption, draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.17 would provide that body with
a firm road map for combating violence against
women. Lastly, the draft resolution contained a number
of recommendations on preventing violence against
women for Member States and United Nations bodies.
2. Mr. Gustafik (Acting Secretary of the
Committee) announced that the Dominican Republic,
Haiti, Serbia and Togo had also joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.18: Supporting efforts to
end obstetric fistula
3. Ms. Karim (Malawi), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of African States,
said that Belgium, the Czech Republic and Indonesia
had joined the list of sponsors. Progress towards
achieving Millennium Development Goal 5, improving
maternal health, was slower than with regard to any of
the other Goals. Over half a million women died in
childbirth annually and for every woman who died,
some 20 others were injured or disabled. Obstetric
fistula was a major cause of that situation in many
developing countries, affecting over 2 million women
in Africa, Asia and the Arab region, with between
50,000 and 100,000 new cases each year. Its victims
were generally poor, illiterate women in remote areas,
where gender discrimination was widespread and
access to health care limited.
4. The draft resolution reprised the resolution
adopted by the Third Committee two years earlier. It
called for the international community and all relevant
stakeholders to give particular attention to maternal
health, especially the prevention and treatment of
obstetric fistula. The draft resolution reflected the
recommendations made in the Secretary-General’s
report (A/65/268) for action to be undertaken at
national, regional and international levels to prevent
obstetric fistula and end maternal morbidity and
mortality.
5. Mr. Gustafik (Acting Secretary of the
Committee) announced that the Dominican Republic,
Haiti, Finland, Portugal and Switzerland had also
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.19: International Widows’Day
6. Mr. Makanga (Gabon), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.19, noted that Angola, Benin,
Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African Republic,
Chad, the Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Sudan, and Timor-Leste had joined the sponsors. Issues
linked to the social conditions of widows had not yet
been directly addressed by the United Nations.
Following the deaths of their husbands, women and
their children often faced increased vulnerability, and
thousands of widows were victims of social injustice,
discrimination and sexual abuse. The draft resolution
would declare 23 June every year as International
Widows’ Day, thus raising awareness globally of the
situation of widows and their children and providing an
opportunity to express solidarity with widows
everywhere.
7. Mr. Gustafik (Acting Secretary of the
Committee) announced that the Chile and Togo had
also joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.20: Trafficking in women
and girls
8. Ms. Hernando (Philippines), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.20, said that the draft resolution
aimed to update a similar resolution that had been
adopted at the sixty-third session of the General
Assembly, which called upon Governments, inter alia,A/C.3/65/SR.21
3 10-59223
to eliminate the demand for trafficked women and girls
and ensure that victims of trafficking were not
penalized for being trafficked.
9. Mr. Gustafik (Acting Secretary of the
Committee) announced that Cameroon, Chile, the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Togo had also
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/65/336)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/65/40 (Vol. I), A/65/40 (Vol. II),
A/65/44, 48, 94, 190, 265, 317 and 381)
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action (A/65/36)
10. The Chairman invited the Committee to
continue its general discussion of sub-item (a) and to
begin the general discussion of sub-item (d) of agenda
item 68.
11. Mr. Ali (Sudan) said that the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
affirmed, inter alia, the right of all peoples to
self-determination. However, the implementation of
international human rights instruments had been far
from satisfactory. Efforts to protect human rights had
been impeded by several factors, including the
financial crisis, conflicts and environmental disasters
linked to climate change. Those factors negatively and
directly impacted the promotion and protection of
human rights, especially in developing countries where
economic crises had caused numerous conflicts. The
threats to human rights posed by those crises could be
addressed only through equitable international
economic engagement between the North and the
South and by assisting developing countries to
overcome the challenges that they faced.
12. By exploiting the mass media, a number of major
Powers sought to politicize human rights. Human
rights values and principles were seriously undermined
by double standards or when they were exploited for
political ends or to the detriment of the culture and
beliefs of others. Mechanisms to implement
international human rights instruments were
insufficient and the world must stand firm against
increasingly frequent incidents of racism and religious
intolerance.
13. The Sudan fully respected the right to freedom of
expression. However that freedom must not be used as
a justification for attacks against religions or beliefs.
Many people continued to suffer religious
discrimination, particularly following the events of
11 September 2001, and many languished in official or
secret prisons where they were tortured and continued
to have their rights violated.
14. The Sudan was committed to upholding
international human rights instruments. Rights and
freedoms were enshrined in the Sudanese Constitution,
the formulation of which had drawn on the spirit of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 2005. Its
Constitutional Court safeguarded human rights at the
highest judicial level, and the Advisory Council on
Human Rights was working to further strengthen
respect for those rights. In free and fair elections in
2010, the people of Sudan had elected the President of
the country and a parliament that encompassed the
entire political spectrum. The Sudan had also enacted
laws to guarantee Internet freedom and access to
information.
15. The most recent report by the independent expert
on the situation of human rights in the Sudan had noted
several positive developments. The Sudan was striving
to address issues in post-conflict areas in the South and
in western Sudan and was cooperating fully with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The Sudan had also announced a
new strategy for Darfur, which strengthened the
participation of its people, including internally
displaced persons, in the political process with a view
to fostering the region’s development. The Sudan was
also participating in negotiations in Doha and was
committed to holding a referendum on self-
determination in South Sudan.
16. Lastly, the Sudan called upon the international
community to reject the imposition of unilateral
sanctions on States, which served to increase hatred
between peoples, and to pay greater attention to the
plight of migrants and minorities, especially those who
suffered under foreign occupation, including in the
occupied Arab territories.
17. Mr. Berti (Cuba) said that his country had made
significant progress in the enjoyment of all human
rights, including economic, social and cultural rights;
civil and political rights; and the realization of
third-generation or solidarity rights. The right toA/C.3/65/SR.21
10-59223 4
self-determination had been achieved despite obstacles
and threats arising from the policy of hostility and the
embargo imposed by successive United States
administrations. Achievements in health care,
education, scientific and technical research, culture and
sports had been possible because the Cuban people
controlled the country’s political fate and resources in
a participatory democracy designed and approved by
the people.
18. Cuba was party to 42 human rights instruments
and took its obligations seriously, including its
reporting obligations. In 2009, Cuba had signed the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance, reflecting its
commitment to the rights established therein. It had
also been the fifth country to ratify the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
19. His Government had supported the establishment
of the Human Rights Council, following the failure of
the Commission on Human Rights, which had been
immersed in politicization and manipulation. Cuba
gave the same priority to economic, social and cultural
rights as to civil and political rights and had engaged
actively in creating international norms for human
rights for all. As a founding and current member, Cuba
continued to promote consolidation of the Council on
the basis of mutual respect, international cooperation
and constructive dialogue.
20. Committed to cooperation with mechanisms
implemented on a universal, non-discriminatory,
non-selective and non-politicized basis, Cuba would
continue to welcome visiting missions under the
special procedures of the Council and had recently
engaged in the universal periodic review, with
excellent results. The former system of sanctions
against countries of the South and automatic impunity
for the countries of the North should not be repeated in
the current human rights system.
21. Ms. Shinohara (Japan) said that the Human
Rights Council and UN Women, established as part of
the reform process, were major advances and would
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the United
Nations human rights apparatus. Japan hoped that the
2011 review of the Human Rights Council would
enable a comprehensive approach to human rights
issues. In 2009, one of the treaty bodies, the Human
Rights Committee, had adopted a new reporting
procedure that would allow it to conduct a more
focused dialogue with States parties and had the added
benefit of significantly reducing their reporting
obligations and the documentation burden of the
Secretariat. The United Nations must continue its
efforts to streamline existing mechanisms, including
other treaty body mechanisms.
22. Japan complied faithfully with its obligations
under all human rights treaties to which it was a party.
Its periodic reports to the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the
Committee on the Rights of the Child had been
considered in 2010, and it would respond in good faith
to any recommendations made. Japan’s Third Basic
Plan for Gender Equality, to be established later in
2010, was expected to include a campaign to publicize
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, its Committee’s most
recent recommendations and her country’s response to
them.
23. Japan had twice amended its Law for the
Prevention of Spousal Violence and the Protection of
Victims. In addition, it had broadened the definition of
spousal violence, reinforced the related protection
orders and strengthened the role of municipalities in
that area. At the international level, Japan had proposed
its candidature to the Executive Board of UN Women.
In general, it intended to continue its efforts to ensure
that the gender-related activities of the United Nations
were well coordinated, efficient and effective.
24. Japan had recently carried out major reforms to
improve the implementation of its policies on persons
with disabilities. In order to improve the policies
themselves, in December 2009 it had established a
ministerial board for disability policy reform, which
was working to make changes faithful to the spirit of
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities. Japan would be active in promoting
international cooperation on the rights of disabled
persons.
25. Her country attached great importance to the
United Nations role in establishing universal normative
standards. It had ratified the new International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance, and had urged other States to
ratify that meaningful instrument. Lastly, Japan fully
supported all of the efforts put into reforming the
international human rights frameworks and wouldA/C.3/65/SR.21
5 10-59223
cooperate with all relevant partners to ensure that the
changes were implemented effectively.
26. Mr. Al-Mesallam (Qatar) said that his country
attached great importance to human rights at all levels
and that fundamental rights and freedoms were
enshrined in its Constitution. Qatar had enacted
legislation to further strengthen those rights and
freedoms and had amended its criminal code so that it
was in line with the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment.
27. Qatar had acceded to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women as well as to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons and had partially
withdrawn its general reservation with regard to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. His country was
also working to implement many of the
recommendations made by the Human Rights
Council’s Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review.
28. Human rights departments had been established
within Qatari ministries. Non-governmental
organizations also promoted respect for human rights,
protected women and children, defended journalists
and combated trafficking in persons. Moreover, Qatar’s
promotion of human rights was enshrined in its foreign
policy, which was based on settling international
disputes peacefully. His country also hosted
international conferences on development, human
rights and peace, as well as on financing for
development and on interfaith dialogue with the
Muslim world.
29. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
Russian President Dmitri Medvedev had said that
standards for democracy which included human rights
standards could be effective only if they were
internationally accepted. Only if such standards were
developed collectively could countries rest assured that
those norms would not be used to limit sovereignty and
interfere in internal affairs.
30. Regrettably, in a number of countries, human
rights were seen as a foreign policy tool and nothing
else. Some countries, believing themselves free of sin,
thought that human rights violations could only occur
elsewhere, although their human rights situations at
home were far from perfect.
31. The establishment of the United Nations and the
modern international system for the promotion and
protection of human rights were direct consequences of
the outcome of the Second World War. It was therefore
deeply regrettable that certain parties were engaging in
revisionist moral and legal assessments of the outcome
of the War in pursuit of short-term political interests.
History was being completely rewritten, executioners
were being represented as victims and liberators as
occupiers. Worst of all, the decisions of the Nuremburg
Trials were being challenged.
32. There was an increase in phenomena which had a
negative impact on respect for human rights, such as
the financial, economic and food crises, terrorism and
natural and man-made disasters. The Russian
Federation had suffered particularly from the latter in
the past few months. Those events had caused
numerous casualties and great suffering. Such threats
and challenges should cause people to look at the
human rights agenda in a new way and focus on
economic, social and cultural rights, as well as on the
right to development. In that connection, the upcoming
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the
Right to Development was much anticipated.
33. The Human Rights Council would soon undergo a
review of its activities and status. Four years after its
launch, the Council had clearly demonstrated its ability
to dispatch its obligations and required no major
reform. The review should focus on eliminating
various problems in the functioning of the Council.
Strengthening cooperation on human rights should be a
central part of the review.
34. Discussions of changes in the status of the
Council were not appropriate at the current time. Issues
related to the division of labour between the Human
Rights Council, the General Assembly and the Third
Committee should be addressed. Proposals by a
number of countries to introduce additional criteria for
election to the Council should not be adopted, as such
an approach would run counter to established practice.
The Russian Federation supported the work of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) and of Ms. Pillay, the High Commissioner.
The degree of cooperation between the Russian
Federation and the Commissioner was satisfactory, and
work on a bilateral cooperation agreement was going
forward.A/C.3/65/SR.21
10-59223 6
35. Democratic institutions in the Russian Federation
were developing dynamically, with particular
importance attached to the contribution of all
stakeholders, including civil society institutions. While
individual instances of human rights problems did
occur, their solution was a priority. Ms. Pillay would
pay a visit to the Russian Federation early in 2011, at
which time she would meet with President Medvedev.
36. Mr. Alnenaiji (United Arab Emirates) said that
human rights principles were guaranteed in the United
Arab Emirates’ domestic legislation and enshrined in
its Constitution. Its citizens enjoyed, inter alia, the
rights to equality, social justice, freedom of expression
and association. Furthermore, torture and arbitrary
arrest and detention were prohibited. His country was a
party to 15 international human rights instruments, had
ratified the Arab Charter on Human Rights and was
taking steps to accede to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment and the two Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Progress made by the United Arab Emirates in the field
of human rights had also been commended by the
Human Rights Council’s Working Group on the
Universal Periodic Review.
37. The United Arab Emirates had established a
national committee to combat trafficking in persons,
had amended its labour laws in order to better protect
migrant workers in the country and had implemented
measures to protect domestic workers, most of whom
were women from abroad. It was also drafting
legislation to regulate the relationship between
domestic workers and their employees, in line with
international standards and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women.
38. The United Arab Emirates had concluded
numerous bilateral and multilateral agreements to
facilitate dialogue with migrant labourers’ countries of
origin. Non-governmental bodies had been established
to promote and protect human rights and legal and
psychological assistance was provided to victims of
abuse, domestic violence and trafficking. His country
was also working to raise awareness of human rights
principles among police officers, the judiciary and in
schools and promoted human rights abroad through its
activities as a major aid donor to developing countries.
39. Israel’s ongoing occupation of Palestinian land
and its brutal practices in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory violated international humanitarian law and
the basic human rights of Palestinians. Israel’s
blockade of the Gaza Strip must immediately be lifted,
in accordance with international humanitarian law and
the recommendations of the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict.
Perpetrators of those crimes must, moreover, be
brought to justice.
40. Mr. Sydykov (Kyrgyzstan) said that his country
had undergone radical changes during the current year,
and that its unity and statehood had been tested. In
April 2010, the Kyrgyz people had overthrown an
authoritarian, corrupt system characterized by
lawlessness and chosen the path of democratic
development. However, in May and June, criminal,
extremist groups had provoked bloody clashes between
members of the Kyrgyz and Uzbek communities. Over
400 people had died, thousands had been injured, many
had lost their homes to fire, and hundreds of other
buildings had been destroyed as well. According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the ethnic clashes had been
planned and organized to destabilize the political
situation. However, the events which had occurred in
the southern part of the country earlier in the year were
in fact due not to ethnic hostilities but were rather
socio-economic and political in nature.
41. A Government commission, whose members
included prominent Kyrgyz and Uzbek officials,
scholars and experts as well as representatives of other
ethnic groups, was actively investigating the causes of
the conflict. An independent international commission
supported by the United Nations, the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Governments of the
Scandinavian countries had also begun an investigation
of the events.
42. Urgent measures had been taken to rebuild
infrastructure in the cities of Osh and Jalal Abad, and
US $100,000,000 had been allocated by the Provisional
Government. A specialized fund had been set up to
receive funds from country donors. A new ethnic
policy was being developed which took into account
the recent painful experiences. A new Constitution that
laid the foundation for parliamentary rule had been
adopted by popular vote in June 2010. The main
purpose of the reform was to establish genuine humanA/C.3/65/SR.21
7 10-59223
rights protection mechanisms, as well as to dismantle
the authoritarian system and ensure that the authorities
were accountable to the people.
43. The new Constitution strengthened civil rights
protections and contained a strict ban on capital
punishment. The section on human rights had been
broadened significantly. In addition, it stated that
international norms of human rights law took priority
over other international treaty norms. A number of
organizations, including the Venice Commission, the
European Union, the United Nations and OSCE had
expressed their approval of the human rights section of
the Constitution.
44. Since obtaining independence, Kyrgyzstan had
ratified seven of the nine principal international human
rights conventions and had assumed obligations under
40 international human rights instruments.
Implementation of the national human rights
programme for the period from 2002 to 2010 was being
monitored, and the results would serve as a starting
point for the national human and civil rights protection
framework for the period 2011 to 2020. A national
project entitled Return to Democracy had been
developed in cooperation with civil society and was
aimed at reforming democratic government
institutions. Parliamentary elections had been held in
early October, and they had received high ratings from
OSCE, the European Parliament and other
organizations.
45. Kyrgyzstan welcomed the initiative to take
measures against torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment. Work was under
way on the issue of establishing a national mechanism
for transparency and openness in correctional facilities.
Following the universal periodic review (UPR) of
Kyrgyzstan’s national human rights report,
168 recommendations had been made. The
Government of Kyrgyzstan had committed to carry out
154 human rights recommendations over the course of
four years. That would require additional financial
investment. Given that the capacity-building of States
and provision of technical and advisory assistance to
fulfil the obligations assumed were among the UPR
objectives, the international community was requested
to provide such assistance.
46. Mrs. Muzumbe-Katongo (Zambia) said that she
was pleased to inform the Committee that her country’s
final draft Constitution recognized not only civil and
political rights but also economic, social and cultural
rights. Furthermore, Zambia had made progress on
amending existing laws and enacting new ones to
incorporate the provisions of international human
rights instruments. It had passed legislation to provide
an effective framework for a fair and equitable criminal
justice system, to protect the rights of persons seeking
refuge or asylum and to end gender-based violence.
47. Since government accountability was important
for the protection of human rights, Zambia had enacted
a whistleblower protection law, and its new disaster
management law would help to alleviate the impact of
natural and other disasters on the enjoyment of human
rights. It had recently established a sex crimes unit and
a victim support unit. In order to improve the general
welfare of children, her country had made the teaching
of human rights, including children’s rights, a part of
the high school curriculum. It had also initiated human
rights training for police officers and continued to
implement a food security programme offering material
and technical assistance to farmers.
48. In February, Zambia had ratified the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It was
imperative for States to report progress on the
implementation of human rights instruments to the
relevant treaty bodies. Her country appreciated the
useful recommendations that had been made by those
bodies, but it continued to face material and technical
challenges that hindered the timely submission of its
State party reports.
49. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that,
throughout history, human rights concepts had always
been important, particularly in people’s struggles to
obtain food and drinking water and to combat slavery,
oppression and poverty. Human rights must be viewed
through the unique experience of each country, taking
into account, inter alia, its history, language and
customs. In its Constitution and laws, her country had
accorded special attention to safeguarding civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights, in
accordance with international human rights law and
had acceded to numerous human rights instruments.
50. While some saw the accelerating pace of
political, economic, scientific and social change
positively, for others it was a source of great concern.
Despite vast improvements in the material quality of
life for many, conflicts continued to give rise to
humanitarian disasters and crimes that included murderA/C.3/65/SR.21
10-59223 8
and ethnic cleansing. Although promises of peace and
security were made at regional and international
conferences, efforts to address the most blatant and
widespread violations of human rights, including
foreign aggression and occupation, remained subject to
political manipulation.
51. The Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action had, inter alia, called for effective international
measures to guarantee and monitor the implementation
of human rights standards in respect of people under
foreign occupation. Foreign occupation was in itself a
serious violation of human rights: to put an end to that
violation, the occupation itself must cease.
52. The Syrian Arab Republic therefore called upon
the international community to work together to ensure
that human rights standards and the provisions of
United Nations instruments were respected by all,
without exception. Moreover, the international
community, in addressing human rights issues, must
accord priority to the most heinous violations,
including the crime of occupation, and to implementing
measures that were commensurate with the grave
human rights violations committed by Israel in the
occupied Arab territories, which included torture,
collective punishment and the expulsion of the Arab
population from their homes and lands.
53. Mr. Alibabaee (Islamic Republic of Iran),
addressing sub-item (a) of agenda item 68, said that his
Government attached great importance to the role of
international human rights instruments in the
promotion and protection of human rights. Hence, it
had acceded to many of the core international human
rights treaties, including the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and had
recently signed the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
54. His Government had fully engaged in the
universal periodic review of the Human Rights Council
and had submitted periodic reports to the various treaty
monitoring bodies for the instruments acceded to by
the Islamic Republic of Iran. His Government
considered those two monitoring mechanisms to be
important elements in the United Nations human rights
system.
55. The universal, indivisible and interrelated nature
of all economic, social, cultural, civil and political
rights should be fully respected by all Member States,
and any selective national policy in those areas must be
avoided, in accordance with the spirit of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. However, national and
regional particularities, as well as cultural, historical
and religious factors, should be taken into account in
the joint efforts to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
56. Referring to sub-item (d), he said that the
adoption of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action in 1993 and the holding of the World
Conference on Human Rights the same year had
marked a turning point for the promotion of human
rights. Economic and social rights and the binding
nature of the right to development must receive the
same attention as political and civil rights. The existing
international order was characterized by selectivity and
economic and political exploitation.
57. The international community must seriously
consider religious, national and cultural particularities
in order to decelerate growing trends of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
The majority of such cases targeted Islam and
Muslims, the most recent example had been the call to
burn a copy of the Koran on 11 September 2010 in the
United States of America. Fortunately, that appeal had
been met with condemnation. There was a pressing
need to be aware and take action against the rapidly
growing phenomenon of anti-Muslim sentiments and
actions.
58. The Islamic Republic of Iran had cooperated in
the field of human rights with the members of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and with members of
the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC). His
country’s proposal to designate 5 August each year as
Islamic Human Rights and Human Dignity Day had
been adopted by the OIC Council of Foreign Ministers
to provide an opportunity to celebrate and introduce
aspects of human rights promoted and strengthened by
Islam.
59. The Islamic Republic of Iran hosted the NAM
Center for Human Rights and Cultural Diversity, which
had begun its activities with the aim of realizing the
goals and objectives of the Tehran Declaration andA/C.3/65/SR.21
9 10-59223
Programme of Action on Human Rights and Cultural
Diversity.
60. The Vienna Declaration put particular emphasis
on the right to development as an inalienable
component of human rights. The call for the realization
of that right was as urgent now as when it had been
made in 1993. However, obstacles to its realization
made it unachievable in the foreseeable future. The
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action paid
particular attention to the regional, cultural and
historical backgrounds of each State in addressing
human rights, while also focusing on the principle of
the universality of human rights.
61. Mr. Tharoor (India) said that his delegation
welcomed the institutionalization of inalienable human
rights within the United Nations system, in particular,
through the establishment of the Human Rights
Council and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR). However, a comprehensive
debate on human rights was possible only if the
importance of economic, social and cultural rights,
including the right to development and the links
between those rights and civil and political rights, was
fully understood.
62. He also welcomed the streamlining of the treaty
bodies reporting process, which had reduced
duplication and helped to maintain uniform standards
and the timely submission of country reports. OHCHR
support provided to developing countries to prepare
those reports was also greatly appreciated. The
harmonization of the procedures had also improved the
ability of the treaty body committees to make
assessments and recommendations, which had of
course done much to strengthen domestic legislation.
Nevertheless, treaty bodies should give due credence to
development, democracy and human rights as
interrelated issues. He reiterated India’s support for the
treaty bodies and commitment to fulfilling its reporting
obligations. However, his delegation was concerned
about the delay in the consideration of country reports
by the treaty bodies. Any initiatives to speed up the
process, including holding additional meetings, would
be supported by India. He urged OHCHR to take all the
necessary steps to deal with the backlog.
63. His country commended the success of the
universal periodic review process, in particular the fact
that all Member States would have undergone the
process by 2011, just five years after the mechanism
was introduced. That achievement was largely due to
the efforts made by participating countries, as well as
the support of OHCHR and civil society. He also
recognized the complementarity of the universal
periodic review with other human rights mechanisms,
highlighted by the fact that the review
recommendations were guided by the observations,
recommendations and conclusions of treaty bodies,
special procedures and OHCHR reports.
64. As perhaps the world’s largest representative
democracy, India prided itself on its parliamentary
system, democratic values, constitutional guarantees,
impartial judiciary, free and vibrant media, thriving
civil society and well established non-governmental
organizations, and would continue to promote and
protect fundamental freedoms and human rights for all
citizens.
65. Mr. Gamaha (United Republic of Tanzania) said
that his country was party to many human rights
instruments, including regional mechanisms, and
would continue to participate in the resulting treaty
obligations. To that end, legislation and administrative
measures had been adopted, policy and regulatory
bodies set up, and affirmative action taken, following
the establishment of the multiparty political system in
the 1990s. Actions to foster and cooperate with civil
society and the media had been introduced to enable
them to play a complementary role in promoting and
protecting human rights. In addition, public education
and awareness-raising programmes had been
implemented by the Commission for Human Rights
and Good Governance.
66. His Government had mainstreamed human rights
as indicators and targets of progress in poverty
alleviation within the National Development Visions.
The second phase of the national strategy for growth
and poverty reduction included activities to improve
good governance, access to justice, gender equality and
the advancement of women. Efforts to mainstream the
issue of persons with disabilities in the national
strategy, further to the ratification of the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in November
2009 and the adoption of the Persons with Disabilities
Act in April 2010, and to comply with treaty body
recommendations were being hampered by limited
resources.
67. The support of the international community
would be needed to achieve full compliance. Similarly,A/C.3/65/SR.21
10-59223 10
the proposed national human rights plan of action
would require additional financial support from the
international community to ensure its full
implementation. Lastly, the national report of the
United Republic of Tanzania would be considered
under the universal periodic review in October 2011
and had been prepared following training and financial
and technical assistance from the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), and with
contributions from relevant institutions, the private
sector and civil society.
68. Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea) said that
the long-standing gap between norms and practices in
the promotion and protection of human rights remained
daunting. To address it, greater effort was required.
First, States parties needed to provide better cooperation
and support for treaty body mechanisms, including
periodic reports, reviews and country visits. It was a
matter of concern that some States had never
cooperated with the special rapporteurs. For its own
part, his country would continue to cooperate fully
with the treaty bodies and had submitted the required
periodic reports. It was making a sincere effort to
implement the recommendations made by the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in
response to its third periodic report.
69. Secondly, the universal periodic review had
proved a valuable tool despite initial concerns about
duplication, and States should make serious efforts to
follow up on universal periodic review recommendations.
In particular, they should not use the review as a
mechanism for defending human rights violations. The
Republic of Korea noted with appreciation the report
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(A/65/36), which showed the Office’s far-reaching and
practical efforts to protect and promote human rights.
70. Lastly, the Human Rights Council’s effectiveness
and credibility would be strengthened by its upcoming
review. It needed to find ways to enhance its ability to
deal with chronic and emergency human rights
situations and to increase the impact of its work. As a
founding member of the Council, his country would
continue to endeavour to make useful contributions to
its review process.
71. Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) said that his country
was party to virtually all the international human rights
instruments and supported the promotion and
protection of civil and political rights, as well as
economic, social and cultural rights, through a set of
regulations and laws and internal mechanisms. Recent
ratification by Algeria of the International Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families and the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as well as the
lifting of reservations to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, demonstrated Algeria’s commitment to human
rights.
72. The National Advisory Commission for the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights was
governed by legislative provisions defining its mission.
An independent body within the Office of the
President, it guaranteed the basic rights of citizens and
stood ready to denounce all violations of human rights.
There was a required course on human rights in the
schools, and the principles of tolerance of dialogue and
a culture of peace were discussed in textbooks. Gender
equality was also covered. People working in law
enforcement received training on international human
rights instruments.
73. Civil society organizations were an essential
partner in human rights work, contributing actively to
the various reforms which had been carried out in
Algeria. His country made no distinction between civil,
political, economic, social or cultural rights or the right
to development. Consideration of human rights must be
carried out with respect for objectivity, impartiality and
non-selectivity.
74. The review of various national legislative and
regulatory codes and texts aimed to protect human
rights more effectively, in accordance with
international norms and treaty commitments. The
promotion of the political rights of women and
facilitation of their representation in elected assemblies
and effective participation in decision-making at all
levels had been incorporated in the Constitution.
Human trafficking had been criminalized. Work had
been done to improve prison conditions. To date,
Algeria had submitted nearly 40 reports to international
and regional human rights bodies.
75. Adherence to international human rights
instruments should not be selective. The implementation
of the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
was weakened due to non-ratification of the
Convention by industrialized countries that nonethelessA/C.3/65/SR.21
11 10-59223
emphasized their attachment to human rights. The
countries which had ratified the Convention were
primarily those where migratory flows originated,
rather than developed countries.
76. Despite significant human rights advances, many
peoples still lacked their essential rights. The right to
self-determination of peoples under foreign occupation
was necessary for an international order based on
respect for human rights. Human rights and the rights
of peoples were closely linked. Implementation of the
right of ethnic groups to be accepted, the right to peace
and self-determination, the right to development and
the right to live free from fear and poverty, in an
environment where the ecological balance of our planet
was preserved, were challenges still to be met.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.