United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.45
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
24 March 2010
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-61507 (E)
*0961507*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 45th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 20 November 2009, at 10 a.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
Agenda item 61: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/64/SR.45
09-61507 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.63)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.63: Office of the President
of the Human Rights Council
1. Ms. Kholi (Switzerland) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.63 on behalf of its sponsors,
which had been joined by Argentina, France, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, New Zealand and Nigeria. She said that
the President of the Human Rights Council required
additional support, as the Council had noted in its
decision 9/103 on the strengthening of the Human
Rights Council. In that decision, the Council had
recommended that the General Assembly ensure the
establishment of an Office of the President of the
Human Rights Council. As the Fifth Committee, at the
sixty-third session, had not made the necessary
appropriations for the creation of that Office, the draft
text, which Switzerland hoped would be adopted by
consensus at the following session, represented a
compromise, following extensive consultations, which
should pave the way for the establishment of the
Office. While delegations had agreed that the President
of the Council required more effective support, they
had wished to examine further the modus operandi of
the Office.
2. The Chairperson said that Romania and Somalia
had also joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
Agenda item 61: Social development (continued)
(A/C.3/64/L.37)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.37: Situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
3. Mr. McNee (Canada) noted a continuing
deterioration in the situation of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran since the adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 63/191, particularly
following the presidential election of 12 June 2009.
The 41 sponsors had not taken lightly the decision to
introduce the draft resolution, and every effort had
been made to produce an accurate text reflecting events
that had taken place during the year. The sponsors all
hoped that the day would come when such resolutions
would no longer be necessary, because the Iranian
Government would be willing to abide by its human
rights obligations, or at least would recognize that, like
all nations, it faced human rights challenges. The
claims of the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran that cooperation was preferable to resolutions
lacked credibility, because its behaviour, recalled in
paragraphs 5 and 6 of the draft resolution, did not
reflect any willingness to cooperate with relevant
international mechanisms. As long as Iranian citizens
themselves could not address human rights issues
without fear of persecution, the Third Committee,
which was the only body with universal membership
responsible for addressing those issues at the
international level, could not overlook the continued
violations of fundamental rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran. Accordingly, Canada urged all
delegations to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
4. Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran) noted
that the Government of Canada was persisting, for the
seventh consecutive year, to divert the Third
Committee from the purpose of its work by putting
forward a highly politicized draft resolution that
reflected its animosity towards the Islamic Republic of
Iran. The Third Committee should refuse to engage in
such political games, which turned human rights —
one of the highest human aspirations — into a crude
tool for promoting the foreign policy of certain States.
Selectivity, politicization and the application of double
standards had given rise to confrontation and
polarization, which undermined the ability of the
United Nations to effectively promote human rights.
5. That was demonstrated by the fact that a few
countries, including Canada, the main sponsor of the
draft resolution under consideration, had voted against
the draft resolution on the report of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, and that
the sponsors of the draft resolution themselves had
indefensible records when it came to human rights. In
fact, objective information from reliable sources, such
as intergovernmental organizations, treaty bodies of the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations,
showed that Canada was not living up to its
international human rights obligations. The sources
pointed to systematic violations, including
discriminatory and abusive measures against its
indigenous people, immigrants and minorities, as well
as police violence. It was a sad irony that the list ofA/C.3/64/SR.45
3 09-61507
sponsors of the draft resolution included the Israeli
regime, whose very creation and existence were
intertwined with the worst forms of human rights
violations.
6. Some information contained in the draft
resolution was erroneous, as it was contradicted in
particular by the report of the Secretary-General
(A/64/357), which Canada would have been well-
advised to study more attentively. For example, the
allegations made in paragraph 2 came from unreliable
sources, and paragraph 3 painted an entirely erroneous
picture of the presidential election of 12 June 2009.
There had been a record 85 per cent turnout for the
election and, thanks to existing mechanisms, the rights
of both voters and candidates had been protected and
guaranteed. With regard to paragraph 5, the Islamic
Republic of Iran was surprised by the failure to
recognize its genuine cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and with special procedures mandate holders of
the Human Rights Council. Moreover, the Islamic
Republic of Iran was particularly surprised to note that
it was being called upon, pursuant to its obligations, to
report to the treaty bodies of the instruments to which
it was party. His country had already done so, however,
since it had recently submitted its periodic reports on
the implementation of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The Islamic Republic of Iran had also submitted its
universal periodic review report, which the Human
Rights Council would consider in February 2010.
Lastly, paragraph 3 (g) of the draft resolution implicitly
requested the granting of a form of diplomatic
immunity to local employees of foreign embassies.
Such a request had no legal basis nor did it have any
relevance to human rights issues.
7. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
was more aware than anyone of its responsibilities and
was committed to observe and implement the
provisions of its Constitution, including the obligations
arising from relevant international instruments. Its
human rights policies had always focused on
interaction and cooperation in order to build national
capacities and to encourage constructive participation
in national and international promotional activities.
The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran was
also engaged in the process of creating and
strengthening monitoring mechanisms to ensure the
realization of human rights, democracy and
development, as well as the existence of a
representative, transparent and accountable
Government.
8. Recalling that no Government could claim to be
perfect, he invited delegations to oppose the
manipulation of human rights and existing protection
mechanisms. Delegations should maintain the dignity,
credibility and legitimacy of those mechanisms by
voting against the draft resolution. The Islamic
Republic of Iran had requested a recorded vote on the
draft resolution.
9. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking on
behalf of the States members of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, explained that he opposed the
practice of introducing country-specific resolutions
that selectively targeted developing and Muslim
countries for political reasons. That practice led to the
extreme politicization of the work of human rights
bodies and in no way served the stated cause.
10. The situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran did not justify the introduction of a
draft resolution targeting that country in particular,
given that it had always been prepared to engage in
dialogue and cooperation in order to promote human
rights. It was also regrettable to note the selectivity
shown by the sponsors of the draft resolution under
consideration, despite such goodwill and the positive
developments that had occurred in the Islamic
Republic of Iran. All States should therefore agree to
oppose the draft resolution.
11. Mr. Hassan (Sudan) said that the draft resolution
targeted the Islamic Republic of Iran in a selective
manner. The Human Rights Council was the competent
body to address such issues and should play its role in
a strictly neutral, impartial and non-selective manner
through dialogue with the countries concerned. The
politicization of human rights was counterproductive
and only heightened tensions. In keeping with its
position of principle, the Sudan would vote against the
draft resolution.
12. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that her
country was strongly opposed to country-specific draft
resolutions designed to single out certain countries of
the South for political reasons unrelated to the
protection of human rights. The harmful practice of
selectivity, double standards and politicization in theA/C.3/64/SR.45
09-61507 4
monitoring of human rights was responsible for
discrediting the Commission on Human Rights, which
had led to its demise. The only way to promote and
defend human rights effectively was to promote
genuine international cooperation based on the
principles of objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity.
The Human Rights Council, thanks in particular to its
universal periodic review mechanism, was able to
study the situation of human rights in all countries on
an equal footing and as part of a constructive dialogue.
Since the draft resolution under consideration was
politically motivated and sought to put pressure on the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Cuba would vote against it.
13. Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that his
country remained loyal to the principles contained in
General Assembly resolution 60/251. His delegation
believed that the Human Rights Council was the
appropriate body to address the issue under
consideration and that the universal periodic review
mechanism should receive unanimous support.
Country-specific resolutions adopted by bodies outside
Geneva were divisive and counterproductive. It was
important to accord human rights issues the importance
that they deserved, to end the “naming and shaming” of
certain countries, and to abandon confrontation in
favour of genuine dialogue and cooperation. It was also
important to maintain the impartiality of the Human
Rights Council. The Solomon Islands, which rejected
selectivity, double standards and the politicization of
human rights, would therefore abstain from voting on
the draft resolution.
14. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) reiterated
his country’s position of principle against any
interference in the domestic affairs of a State on the
pretext of defending human rights. The principle of the
sovereign equality of all Member States was clearly
articulated in the Charter of the United Nations.
Understanding and an objective dialogue based on
mutual respect for national sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as well as non-selectivity and transparency,
would bridge the gap between divergent opinions,
strengthen cooperation and ensure the universal
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
while drawing the requisite attention to national,
regional and cultural specificities. Human rights issues
should be considered by the appropriate body — the
Human Rights Council — and not by the Third
Committee. In that connection, the Islamic Republic of
Iran had recently submitted to the Human Rights
Council its universal periodic review report, an
instrument which Member States had endorsed upon
the creation of the Council.
15. The persistent submission of country-specific
draft resolutions on human rights for political reasons
that were known to all undermined the credibility of
international organizations and human rights
instruments. That was particularly true in the current
case, where Israel had joined the sponsors of a draft
resolution on human rights at a time when a draft
resolution on the Goldstone report — which had noted
serious violations of the fundamental rights of the
Palestinian people committed by Israel during its
aggression against Gaza — had just been adopted.
Human rights issues must be considered in a spirit of
encouragement, understanding and dialogue, without
any State being defamed for reasons unrelated to the
protection of human rights. The Syrian Arab Republic
urged other delegations to oppose such texts, which
reflected double standards in the consideration of
human rights issues. It would vote against the draft
resolution.
16. Mr. Abubaker (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said
that he regretted the insistence of some States on
introducing politically motivated country-specific draft
resolutions on the pretext of defending human rights
when they themselves applied policies that were
contrary to international human rights law. The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya opposed that practice and the use of
the Third Committee for political purposes that were
contrary to the sovereignty of States, particularly given
that the Human Rights Council had been established to
consider all matters relating to the promotion and
protection of human rights. Stressing the importance of
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, he
said that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya would vote
against the draft resolution. However, that vote should
not be interpreted as support for human rights
violations anywhere in the world.
17. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) said that her country strongly opposed the
practice whereby some Member States continued to
censure certain States selectively on the pretext of their
human rights records. Country-specific draft
resolutions served specific political interests and
maintained a strategic confrontation, which was
undesirable. The Governments of the draft resolution’s
sponsors had themselves committed human rightsA/C.3/64/SR.45
5 09-61507
violations, yet they had not been subject to such
resolutions. The Human Rights Council had been
established to examine such cases and the universal
periodic review guaranteed an impartial, objective and
non-selective study of the human rights situation in
every country. Furthermore, any measure adopted by
the United Nations to promote and defend human
rights should be based on international cooperation and
dialogue among States. For all those reasons, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would vote against
the draft resolution and urged all delegations to follow
suit in order to prevent the manipulation of human
rights, which undermined efforts to promote such
rights.
18. A recorded vote was taken on the draft resolution
as a whole.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Vanuatu.
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritania,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Senegal,
Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Colombia,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Ethiopia, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Paraguay, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Suriname,
Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Zambia.
19. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.37 was adopted by
74 votes to 48, with 59 abstentions.
20. Mr. Perez (Brazil), noting that his country had
abstained, encouraged the Islamic Republic of Iran to
cooperate with the Human Rights Council and the
other United Nations entities responsible for the
protection and promotion of human rights. In that
regard, the Human Rights Council should seek to
create an atmosphere conducive to constructive
dialogue and cooperation in order to improve the
human rights situation around the globe. Certain
aspects of the human rights situation in the Islamic
Republic of Iran that had been raised in the Secretary-
General’s report on the issue (A/64/357) remained a
source of concern, including the rights of minorities,
particularly those of the Baha’i community. While it
had made some progress on social, economic and
cultural rights, the Islamic Republic of Iran must do
more to promote the rights of women, strengthen
freedom of speech and protect students, journalists,
human rights defenders and local embassy staff from
arbitrary detention and persecution. A constructive
dialogue on the issue could take place when the Iranian
Government submitted its universal periodic review
report.A/C.3/64/SR.45
09-61507 6
21. Mr. Yahiaoui (Algeria) said that his delegation
traditionally voted against country-specific draft
resolutions because they were based on selectivity and
politicization and maintained a climate of
confrontation that was detrimental to the cause of
human rights. In Algeria’s view, the universal periodic
review was the appropriate mechanism to examine the
human rights situation in all countries without
exception; only cooperation based on sincere dialogue
would foster human rights protection. Accordingly, that
mechanism must aim to help States achieve better
results in human rights promotion and protection.
22. Ms. Taracena Secaira (Guatemala) said that
respect for human rights, in particular the provisions of
the relevant international instruments, was one of the
pillars of her country’s foreign policy. In that context,
Guatemala was concerned by the setbacks in the area
of civil and political rights mentioned in the Secretary-
General’s report on the situation of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran (A/64/357). Nevertheless, her
delegation had noted the information conveyed by the
Iranian authorities, particularly the fact that their
country would participate in the universal periodic
review. For those reasons, Guatemala had abstained
from the vote on the draft resolution and would await
the outcome of the universal periodic review before
taking a position.
23. Ms. Velichko (Belarus) explained that her
country had voted against draft resolutions
A/C.3/64/L.35, L.36* and L.37 because it considered
that country-specific draft resolutions, which Belarus
had itself been subject to, were contrary to the
principles of objectivity and non-selectivity that should
govern the consideration of human rights issues.
Through the universal periodic review, the United
Nations was able to analyse the human rights situation
in all countries effectively while fostering dialogue,
and to encourage Governments to strengthen national
mechanisms and adopt a responsible attitude. Human
rights promotion must be based on equitable
constructive dialogue, not on selective draft resolutions
that sowed discord.
24. Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh), explaining his
country’s position on the draft resolution, said that he
was disturbed by the information that indicated a
deterioration in the human rights situation in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, particularly regarding the
detention of members of the opposition following the
presidential elections of 12 June 2009. Bangladesh
encouraged the Islamic Republic of Iran to meet its
human rights obligations. In that regard, it was more
effective to seek to improve respect for human rights
by maintaining dialogue with the countries concerned
than by adopting resolutions that targeted them.
Bangladesh had therefore been compelled to vote
against the draft resolution. Its vote should not,
however, be taken as a show of support for the conduct
of the Islamic Republic of Iran in the area of human
rights.
25. Mr. Okuda (Japan) explained that his country
had voted in favour of the draft resolution because it
was necessary to continue improving the human rights
situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran. He shared the
concerns expressed in the draft resolution regarding
restrictions on the media and the legal proceedings
brought against employees of foreign embassies after
the presidential elections of June 2009.
26. Several years earlier, the Iranian and Japanese
Governments had opened a bilateral dialogue on
human rights in which the Islamic Republic of Iran
participated actively. The Iranian Government had even
proposed projects for cooperation, including on judicial
reform. Japan commended that country’s willingness to
adopt an approach based on cooperation and to move
forward. He also welcomed its ratification in 2008 of
the Convention of the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities. For those reasons, Japan had not
sponsored the draft resolution. It would actively pursue
the dialogue and cooperation undertaken with the
Islamic Republic of Iran in order to ensure that human
rights were more fully respected there.
27. Mr. Gatan (Philippines) explained that his
country had abstained during the votes on draft
resolutions A/C.3/64/L.35, L.36* and L.37. Recalling
the position adopted by the Heads of State of the
non-aligned countries at the summit meeting held in
Egypt in July 2009, he invited the General Assembly to
evaluate how effective country-specific resolutions had
actually been in encouraging the Governments
concerned to improve their human rights records.
Through the establishment of the Human Rights
Council and the universal periodic review, the General
Assembly had shown that there were better ways of
addressing human rights issues. The Philippines
therefore urged the Assembly to continue along that
path and to eschew country-specific resolutions in
favour of a constructive approach based on dialogue
and the provision of assistance.A/C.3/64/SR.45
7 09-61507
28. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) pointed
out to the representative of the Philippines that his
statement should have pertained only to the draft
resolution that had just been adopted.
29. Mr. Gatan (Philippines) expressed surprise that
the Secretary had not made the same remark to the
representative of Belarus.
30. Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran),
thanking the delegations that had voted against the
draft resolution or had abstained from the vote,
welcomed the fact that the majority of Member States
had not supported the resolution and noted that
measures must be taken to prevent the misuse of the
United Nations by certain countries.
Agenda item 61: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social Development and of the
twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.9/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.9/Rev.1: Implementation
of the outcome of the World Summit for Social
Development and of the twenty-fourth special session
of the General Assembly
31. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
did not have any programme budget implications.
32. Mr. Hassan (Sudan), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of its sponsors, which had been
joined by Belgium, Montenegro, Portugal, Sweden,
Switzerland and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, pointed out that the text focused on the
main areas of action set out at the World Summit for
Social Development. The draft resolution, which would
ensure an ongoing global dialogue and a continued
commitment to social development, provided a general
framework to promote social development for all at the
national and international levels. It also called for a
study of the impact of various crises on social
development. The sponsors hoped that the draft
resolution would be adopted by consensus.
33. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belarus,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey,
Ukraine and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland had also become sponsors.
34. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.9/Rev.1 was adopted
without a vote.
35. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that,
while he welcomed the adoption by consensus of the
draft resolution, he regretted that it did not contain a
more balanced analysis of the impact of external as
well as internal factors on sustainable development.
While external factors, such as crises or oil shocks,
could affect countries’ socio-economic development,
the national policies applied by their Governments had
the most decisive impact.
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued) (A/C.3/64/L.8/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.8/Rev.1: Proclamation of
2010 as International Year of Youth: Dialogue and
Mutual Understanding
36. The Chairperson informed the Committee that
the draft resolution contained no programme budget
implications.
37. Mr. Hassan (Sudan) noted that Mexico, the
Russian Federation and Turkey had joined the sponsors
of the draft resolution, which reaffirmed the
commitment of countries to young people and helped
to foster dialogue and mutual understanding on issues
of relevance to them. The sponsors hoped that the draft
resolution would be adopted by consensus.
38. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Belarus had joined the list of sponsors.
39. Ms. Park Enna (Republic of Korea), seeking
clarification on a procedural issue, asked whether there
were any guidelines for the proclamation of
international days and, if so, what the main elements
were. She also wished to know whether the draft
resolution under consideration complied with the
guidelines, if any, and, if not, whether the Third
Committee had the competence to disregard them.
40. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that guidelines had indeed been adopted by the
Economic and Social Council and then by the GeneralA/C.3/64/SR.45
09-61507 8
Assembly in its resolution 35/424. Referring to
paragraphs 7 and 11 of that text, he said that those
guidelines were not mandatory. Hence, the adoption of
the draft resolution would not be in violation of the
guidelines. However, it must also be acknowledged
that such action would not be in keeping with the spirit
of those guidelines.
41. Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) pointed out that Tunisia had
already provided a similar explanation when the issue
had been raised during informal consultations. Member
States were striving to comply with the guidelines,
particularly with regard to paragraphs 7 and 16.
However, it was ultimately their responsibility to make
the final decision, given the urgency and specificities
of the situation. He was convinced that the draft
resolution complied with the guidelines, given the
many examples of international years that had been
proclaimed in the six months prior to their
commencement.
42. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.8/Rev.1 was adopted
without a vote.
43. Ms. Park Enna (Republic of Korea) said that her
country was firmly committed to youth development
and to disseminating the ideals of peace and respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Her
delegation therefore supported the spirit of the draft
resolution. However, holding the International Year in
2010 would leave very little time to define its
objectives, make the necessary preparations or
mobilize youth and youth movements, whose
participation was vital. The Republic of Korea
regretted the fact that its proposal to hold the
International Year in 2012 had not been adopted.
Despite its disappointment, the Republic of Korea had
joined the consensus and would do its utmost to ensure
that the initiative was productive. It was also very
important that the world conference to be held under
the auspices of the United Nations should be a genuine
success. The modalities for organizing the conference
should therefore be determined following open and
transparent consultations among Member States. It
should be noted that the conference did not necessarily
need to be held before the end of the International Year.
44. Mr. Michelsen (Norway) explained the position
of the following countries after the vote: Andorra,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxemburg,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America. Youth development and the
active participation of young people in activities and
decisions concerning them were long-standing
priorities of all those States. While Norway was
supporting the consensus, it wanted to draw the
attention of the Third Committee to General Assembly
resolution 61/185, which recalled the guidelines for
future international years and stressed the need to
respect the criteria and procedures contained therein.
However, in the current case, the provisions of
paragraph 11 of those guidelines had not been
respected. As the International Year was commencing
in 2010, there might be insufficient time for
preparatory work at both the national and the
international levels. Moreover, youth movements had
not been duly consulted, which was at odds with the
desire for dialogue and mutual understanding that
should be the hallmark of the International Year.
Norway trusted that the President of the General
Assembly would take into account the need to consult
youth movements when organizing informal
consultations on the world conference.
45. Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) expressed his appreciation
to countries for their contributions and extended his
thanks to all delegations for their constructive spirit,
which had allowed the adoption of the draft resolution
by consensus. Given that the text was the product of
lengthy and numerous consultations conducted in an
open and transparent manner, it was regrettable that
some delegations had chosen to raise procedural issues.
The draft resolution took into account the importance
that States attached to youth, to raising their awareness
about issues of concern to them and to promoting
dialogue and mutual understanding in order to better
secure the shared values of tolerance, peace and
freedom. Tunisia urged all Member States to help
achieve the noble goals set for the International Year of
Youth, to place youth once again at the centre of the
international community’s priorities and to mobilize
youth to make the International Year a success.
46. The Chairperson suggested that the Third
Committee should take note, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488, of the document
entitled “World Social Situation 2009: Overview”
(A/64/158 and Corr. 1).
47. It was so decided.A/C.3/64/SR.45
9 09-61507
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.50)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.50: Guidelines for the
Alternative Care of Children
48. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
49. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following countries had joined the
list of sponsors: Albania, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Benin, Comoros, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Honduras, Italy, Netherlands, Peru, Portugal, Republic
of Moldova, Switzerland and Turkey.
50. Mr. Perez (Brazil) noted that the following
countries had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution
since its introduction: Angola, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Colombia, Costa Rica, Finland, Philippines,
Seychelles and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). He
read out an amendment to the end of paragraph 1 that
had been requested by several delegations, which
consisted of replacing the words “for policy and
practice” by “to help inform policy and practice”. In its
resolution 11/7, the Human Rights Council had adopted
by consensus the guidelines contained in the annex to
the present draft resolution, and had decided to submit
them to the General Assembly. According to the United
Nations Study on Violence against Children, more than
8 million girls and boys around the world lived in
institutional care. The guidelines were designed to
promote the protection, development and well-being of
children deprived of parental care in a stable and safe
environment. By adopting the draft resolution, Member
States would send a clear message of their commitment
to promote the fundamental rights of the child. On the
occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, Brazil hoped
that the draft resolution would be adopted by
consensus.
51. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the following delegations had joined
the list of sponsors of the draft resolution: Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Cape Verde, El Salvador, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Serbia, Slovenia, Ukraine and United
Republic of Tanzania.
52. Ms. Edblom (Sweden), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, said that the twentieth anniversary of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child should act as
a catalyst for the implementation of that landmark
instrument. The European Union was strongly
committed to the full exercise of the rights of the child
and hoped that the guidelines would contribute towards
that goal. Even though Member States were not
adopting the guidelines formally, they welcomed them,
in the hope that their use in practice would lead to a
real improvement in protecting the rights of those
children deprived of parental care.
53. Mr. Last (United Kingdom), recalling the firm
commitment of his country to promoting the rights of
the child around the world, said that his country agreed
with the purpose of the guidelines, which provided a
non-binding tool to help inform States about the
different forms of care available to children. While the
United Kingdom supported the draft resolution and
recognized that the Third Committee was not adopting
the guidelines, it nevertheless had some concerns. With
regard to paragraph 35, it did not seem possible to
guarantee that pregnant teenagers would not interrupt
their studies. Moreover, teenage parents could not be
coerced to continue their studies, because it was up to
each individual to decide. Concerning paragraph 47, it
should be borne in mind that certain offences were so
serious that they justified a custodial sentence; and it
was not always in the best interests of the child to
remain with a delinquent parent. With respect to
paragraph 68, it was not an acceptable form of
alternative child care to accord quasi-parental rights to
any person who happened to take care of a child
without an enquiry or a court decision. Under English
law, parental responsibility could only be acquired by
operation of law or by court order. Furthermore, the
wording of paragraph 80 did not reflect British and
European legislation on data protection. Finally, with
regard to paragraph 110, record sharing needed to
respect the right to privacy of all those to whom the
records related. The rights of children could not
supersede those of adults.
54. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his country was determined to protect the well-being
and rights of children worldwide and welcomed the
spirit of the guidelines, which offered useful policy
orientations. However, his country was concerned by
their overly broad scope and wished to point out that
the guidelines were not binding on States. Instead, they
contained recommendations which States could use to
develop policies for children deprived of parental care.
55. Ms. Horsington (Australia) said that her country
agreed with the principles of the guidelines, which tookA/C.3/64/SR.45
09-61507 10
into account the obligations arising from the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Furthermore,
the measures taken by Australia to provide alternative
care for children deprived of parental care reflected the
spirit of the guidelines. Australia had recently
established a national framework for the protection of
children, while the federal Government was working to
develop new standards to reflect best practice across
the country and to ensure that each child or young
person at risk had an appropriate level of care and
protection. She noted, however, that the guidelines
were not yet enforceable in Australia.
56. Ms. Sunderland (Canada) said that her
delegation was pleased to join the consensus on the
draft resolution on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Having commended the work of all those who
had helped to develop the guidelines, she recalled that
they were a practical tool for States and should not
become binding.
57. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.50, as orally revised,
was adopted without a vote.
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.21/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.21/Rev.1
58. The Chairperson noted that the draft resolution
did not have any programme budget implications.
59. Ms. Edblom (Sweden) said that she was pleased
to be presenting the draft resolution on behalf of the
European Union, the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States and all the other sponsors, on the
occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. She noted that
Burkina Faso, Canada, Egypt, Guinea, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Maldives, Mali, Morocco, San Marino,
Seychelles, Swaziland, Turkmenistan and Zimbabwe
had joined the list of sponsors of the resolution. As a
result of the support and collaborative spirit shown by
all concerned, one of the Convention’s principles, a
child’s right to be heard, was duly addressed in section
III of the draft resolution, which contained a series of
measures aiming to guarantee the exercise of that right.
The draft resolution also highlighted the recent
progress that had been made with regard to the
protection and promotion of the rights of the child,
something from which the Third Committee could
draw inspiration for its work in the future, including
during the forthcoming session of the General
Assembly when it would be examining the
implementation of the rights of the child during early
childhood. Sweden hoped that the draft resolution
would be adopted by consensus.
60. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bangladesh, the Central African
Republic, the Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation,
Sri Lanka, Uganda and Vanuatu had joined the list of
sponsors of the draft resolution.
61. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) spoke
about the various steps that his country had taken
relating to the issues addressed in the resolution, such
as the adoption of a law in 2008 to protect victims of
trafficking and one in 2009 on children’s health
insurance, as well as the creation of ombudsman
offices in several States. He highlighted the important
role of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
with which the United States worked closely, as well as
with the Office of the High Commissioner for
Refugees and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to
promote the rights of children. The rights of girls in
particular warranted special attention. The United
States had joined the consensus on the draft resolution,
on the understanding that the text in no way implied
that States must comply with instruments to which they
were not a party, or that they should implement the
obligations under those instruments. In that regard, his
country would pursue its consultations on the
provisions of the second preambular paragraph and
paragraph 2 of the draft. On the occasion of the
twentieth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, the United States recalled that while it
had not ratified that instrument, it was nonetheless a
party to the Convention’s Optional Protocols and was
making every effort to ensure that the rights of children
were fully realized.
62. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.21/Rev.1 was adopted
without a vote.
63. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) welcomed
the adoption of the draft resolution by consensus for
the first time. She stressed that for her country, the
section on children affected by armed conflict fullyA/C.3/64/SR.45
11 09-61507
applied to the situation of children suffering as a result
of foreign occupation. As in the previous year, the
Syrian Arab Republic reserved the right to interpret
certain paragraphs in accordance with its own
legislation.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.38/Rev.1
and L.49)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.38/Rev.1
64. The Chairperson noted that the draft resolution
did not have any programme budget implications.
65. Ms. Tvedt (Norway) expressed the hope that the
draft resolution, which had been the subject of many
consultations, would be adopted by consensus. There
had been an amendment to paragraph 9, with the
phrase “so as to enable the Special Rapporteur to fulfil
her/his mandate even more effectively” being added at
the end. She noted that Belgium, Colombia, Ecuador,
Israel, Liechtenstein, Nigeria, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Turkey and Ukraine had been added to the list of
sponsors of the draft resolution.
66. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Central African Republic,
Equatorial Guinea, Georgia, Haiti, Mali, Malta and
Senegal had been added to the list of sponsors of the
resolution, as orally revised.
67. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) noted that if there had been a recorded vote
on the draft resolution, his country would have
abstained.
68. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.38/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted without a vote.
69. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
country had joined the consensus on the draft
resolution but regretted the fact that some of the
sponsors had refused to include any reference to the
worrying situation of human rights defenders in the
Occupied Territories, even though they were exposed
to grave dangers and were victims of atrocities. Acts
committed against human rights defenders were a
breach of international law. The Syrian Arab Republic
considered that all paragraphs of the draft resolution
applied to the situation of human rights defenders in
the Occupied Territories.
70. In addition to conferring rights upon
non-governmental organizations, the Declaration on
the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups
and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect
Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms also imposed duties and
responsibilities on them. With regard to article 20 of
the Declaration, the Syrian Arab Republic considered
that it reaffirmed the importance of the independence
and sovereignty of peoples and the principle of
non-interference in order to promote dialogue and
respect for rights.
71. Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) said that the
Russian authorities attached the utmost importance to
the actions of human rights defenders, whose
contribution to social development was undeniable,
and commended Norway for the constructive and
transparent approach that it had adopted during the
consultations on the draft resolution.
72. However, the fundamental position of the group
of sponsors, who had refused to include a reference to
the Code of Conduct for Special Procedures Mandate-
holders of the Human Rights Council in the text, was,
to say the least, a cause for confusion and regret. The
Russian Federation trusted that it did not mean the
sponsors had revised their position on that extremely
important document.
73. The Russian Federation considered that the rights
and obligations in the seventh preambular paragraph
applied directly to individuals and civil society
organizations working to defend human rights. As for
the reference in the second preambular paragraph to all
previous General Assembly resolutions on the subject,
in particular resolution 62/152, her delegation
interpreted that as a confirmation of States’ vision and
understanding of the content of the Declaration and it
saw the draft resolution in that light.
74. The Russian Federation did not wish to call into
question the consensus that had been reached after
numerous lengthy consultations. However, in future the
sponsors should act in a more objective manner, refrain
from any wide-ranging or arbitrary interpretations and
not attempt to impose their views about the content of
the Declaration.A/C.3/64/SR.45
09-61507 12
75. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) explained that the Venezuelan Office of the
Ombudsman was part of the national authorities and
worked closely with civil society. While her delegation
had joined the consensus on the draft resolution, it did
not believe that the text was balanced or faithful to the
Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote
and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms. A draft resolution referring to
that Declaration should cover all violations of the
rights of human rights defenders and aim to protect
those rights in all circumstances. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela lamented the selective approach
of the sponsors, who had strongly opposed the
inclusion of examples of the violations suffered by
human rights defenders in certain situations,
particularly in cases of foreign occupation or
domination, or when the democratic and constitutional
order of a State had broken down.
76. The rights and responsibilities of civil society
organizations, and non-governmental organizations in
particular, should have been addressed in more detail.
It was unfortunate that the sponsors had stubbornly
refused to recognize the responsibilities of those
groups, even though they were highlighted in article 18
of the Declaration. Since the work of all civil society
actors in the area of human rights must be impartial,
independent and without political motivations or
special interests, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
stressed that non-governmental organizations should
also be required to fulfil their rights and
responsibilities towards the international community,
because, in many countries, those organizations were
used by foreign Governments to promote their own
political interests and to destabilize the incumbent
Government.
77. The provisions of the draft resolution would be
implemented in accordance with Venezuelan
legislation.
78. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that her
delegation had joined the consensus on the draft
resolution but lamented the sponsors’ refusal to include
references to the Code of Conduct for Special
Procedures Mandate-holders of the Human Rights
Council, which had however been adopted by
consensus by the Council in its resolution 5/2 and
endorsed by the General Assembly. Noting that a
significant number of countries of the South had
requested the inclusion of a reference to that Code of
Conduct, she trusted that the draft resolution would
include such a reference in the future.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.49: Human rights and
cultural diversity
79. The Chairperson announced that action on draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.49 would be postponed.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.