United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.45
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
12 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-63276 (E)
*1063276*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 45th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 11 November 2010, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/65/SR.45
10-63276 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.23/Rev.1: Moratorium on
the use of the death penalty
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Errázuriz (Chile), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Dominican Republic, Madagascar,
Sao Tome and Principe, South Africa, Tuvalu and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had joined the
sponsors.
3. In addition to calling on all Member States to
impose a moratorium on the death penalty, the draft
resolution called on those States that did not do so to
respect the minimum standards, as set out in the annex
to Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/50.
The death penalty was irreversible and irreparable: if a
miscarriage of justice occurred and a death sentence
was carried out, the victim could never receive redress.
Chile commended efforts by some States to reduce the
number of crimes that were punishable by death in
their national legislation and urged adoption of the
draft resolution.
4. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that, although the
irrevocable right to life was safeguarded in all
religions, including Islam, States must also protect
their citizens from serious crimes. Under Islamic law,
the death penalty was only handed down for the most
serious offences and in accordance with due process.
Furthermore, although the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights placed restrictions on the
death penalty, it did not prohibit its use. Instead of
working for the abolition of the death penalty, efforts
should therefore be made to safeguard the right to due
process.
5. The draft resolution implied that the death
penalty was handed down in certain States for political
ends rather than to maintain social order and stability.
By calling on Member States to establish a moratorium
on executions with a view to abolishing the death
penalty, the draft resolution blatantly disregarded the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States, as enshrined in international law and the United
Nations Charter.
6. States must resolve their disputes about the use of
the death penalty through dialogue; no State should
attempt to impose its views on others. In negotiations
on the draft resolution, however, all efforts to reach a
compromise had been unsuccessful and all proposals
put forward with a view to drafting a balanced text had
been rejected on the basis of selectivity. The draft
resolution ignored the world’s normative, socio-
economic and cultural diversity. All Member States
were therefore urged to vote in favour of the proposed
amendments in order to restore some balance to the
draft resolution. Egypt believed, moreover, that the
issue of a moratorium on the death penalty should be
dealt with by the Human Rights Council and not the
General Assembly.
7. The Chair drew the Committee’s attention to the
amendments to draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.23/Rev.1
contained in documents A/C.3/65/L.61 to 63, which
contained no programme budget implications. He
recalled that the Committee had agreed to take action
on the proposed amendments in the order in which they
had been submitted.
8. Mr. Selim (Egypt), introducing the proposed
amendment to the draft resolution contained in
document A/C.3/65/L.61, said that Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China,
Grenada, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, the Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Viet Nam, Yemen
and Zimbabwe had joined in sponsoring the
amendment. The amendment was an attempt to provide
guidance for international cooperation by recalling the
need to ensure respect for the principle of
non-interference in matters of domestic jurisdiction, in
accordance with the Charter. Although the language in
the amendment had been proposed during negotiations
on the draft resolution, the sponsors had refused even
to discuss it. He urged Member States to support
adherence to the principles of the Charter by
supporting the amendment.
9. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Antigua and Barbuda, DemocraticA/C.3/65/SR.45
3 10-63276
People’s Republic of Korea, Guyana and Saint Kitts
and Nevis had joined in sponsoring the amendment.
10. Ms. Chan (Singapore) said that there was no
international consensus on the abolition of the death
penalty. Given that it was a criminal justice issue, not a
human rights matter, every State had the sovereign
right to choose whether to apply capital punishment.
Her delegation had been active in the Committee based
on the value it placed on creating consensus as a means
of achieving progress. It was therefore deeply
disappointed that its proposals to add language to
balance the draft resolution had not been considered.
While some sponsors had made positive efforts in the
discussion, others had been unwilling to make key
changes that would have opened the way to
constructive dialogue on the issue of capital
punishment. She questioned the unilateral approach of
the sponsors in what was purportedly a cross-regional
initiative. The question before the Committee was not
about the merits or demerits of the death penalty itself,
it was rather a question about the sovereign right of a
State to decide on the matter for itself, a right which
was enshrined in the Charter. The amendment
recognized the delicate balance between international
cooperation and national sovereignty, while the draft
resolution undermined it. She urged all delegations to
support all of the proposed amendments.
11. Ms. Zhang Dan (China), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that her delegation
supported the proposed amendment set out in
A/C.3/65/L.61, which reflected the consensus on the
need to uphold the Charter of the United Nations and
reiterated the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, an underlying principle of the
work of the Organization. Expressing her regret that
the sponsors of the draft resolution had not accepted
the amendment, she called on all delegations to
demonstrate their adherence to the purposes and
principles of the Charter by supporting the amendment,
together with the other amendments to the draft
resolution.
12. Mr. Zvachula (Federated States of Micronesia),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that all Member States had undertaken to be guided by
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter. The sponsors of the draft resolution had
avoided quoting selectively from the Charter so as not
to imply an artificial hierarchy between its principles.
Furthermore, General Assembly resolutions could not
violate the sovereignty of any Member State and were
referred to in the Charter as recommendations.
Consequently, the sponsors of the draft resolution
would vote against the proposed amendment.
13. Mr. Makanga (Gabon), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that several United
Nations instruments included general human rights
principles regarding the death penalty. The amendment
proposed by Egypt referred to matters that fell within
State jurisdiction. The amendment appeared redundant
because it took attention away from the purpose of the
draft resolution, which was to establish a moratorium
on executions. Therefore, his delegation would vote
against the amendment.
14. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
although his delegation was a sponsor of the draft
resolution and fully supported it, it would vote in
favour of the amendment proposed by Egypt. It was
difficult to see how it would be possible to vote against
an amendment which contained a reference to the
Charter of the United Nations.
15. At the request of the delegation of Belgium, a
recorded vote was taken on the amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.23/Rev.1 contained in document
A/C.3/65/L.61.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,A/C.3/65/SR.45
10-63276 4
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Honduras, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco,
Peru, Republic of Korea, Samoa, Senegal,
Seychelles, South Africa, Togo, Tuvalu, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Zambia.
16. Draft amendment A/C.3/65/L.61 was rejected by
79 votes to 62, with 31 abstentions.
Draft amendment A/C.3/65/L.62: Moratorium on the
use of the death penalty
17. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
amendment to the draft resolution had no programme
budget implications.
18. Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana), introducing the draft
amendment on behalf of its sponsors, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Qatar, St. Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Singapore, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Viet Nam,
Yemen and Zimbabwe, said that they proposed the
insertion of the following new paragraph after the fifth
preambular paragraph: “Recognizing that many
Member States retain the death penalty on their statutes
for the most serious crimes”.
19. Only 95 Member States had abolished the death
penalty in their jurisdictions and by inserting the
paragraph, the sponsors were not trying to present
arguments for or against the moratorium on the use of
the death penalty, but rather to create a balance with
regard to the issues raised in the draft resolution. States
which retained the death penalty on their statutes and
continued to apply it had sufficient safeguards and
opportunities for redress. The sponsors of the draft
amendment hoped that others would see its merit,
particularly since it put issues concerning the death
penalty into proper perspective, and urged delegations
to support it.
20. The Chair said that Antigua and Barbuda, China,
Grenada, Guyana and Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had
joined the sponsors of that amendment.
21. Ms. Melon (Argentina), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that the draft resolution
before the Committee was the result of extensive
reflection and negotiations. Several proposed
modifications had been incorporated that had
contributed to an important adjustment in its focus
without losing sight of its essence and purpose. The
proposed amendment was based on an article of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
but did not reproduce it in its entirety, as stressing one
part of the article while omitting the other would
destroy the integrity of the proposed text. In addition,
the draft resolution already recognized the effort made
by States that had reduced the number of crimes for
which the death penalty could be imposed. Therefore,
her delegation would vote against the amendment.
22. Mr. Zelioli (Italy), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting and as a sponsor of the draft
resolution, said that his delegation believed that the
proposed amendment was contrary to the purpose of
the draft resolution, which called for a moratorium on
executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty.
In addition, it was redundant in view of the references
to restricting the use of the death penalty as well as the
recognition that the reduction in the number of
offences for which the death penalty could be imposed
was a step towards a moratorium. The proposed
amendment lacked the decisive focus of the draft
resolution. Consequently, Italy would vote against the
proposed amendment.
23. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that the amendment
proposed by Botswana built on international humanA/C.3/65/SR.45
5 10-63276
rights instruments. Its reference to the maintenance of
the death penalty as an effective measure to combat
serious crimes formed part of the international norms
agreed to by all Member States. Thus, the insertion of
that paragraph only brought much-needed balance to a
very biased document that included selective citations
in favour of imposing a moratorium on the death
penalty. Resolutions approved by the General
Assembly were only recommendations, and should
conform to the international legal norms adhered to by
the international community. Therefore Egypt
supported the amendment proposed by Botswana,
inasmuch as it reaffirmed the international obligations
of the Member States.
24. A recorded vote was taken on draft amendment
A/C.3/65/L.62.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Burkina Faso, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Namibia, Peru, Republic of Korea,
Russian Federation, Samoa, Senegal, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Togo, Tuvalu,
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
25. Draft amendment A/C.3/65/L.62 was rejected by
81 votes to 51, with 33 abstentions.
Amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.23/Rev.1
contained in document A/C.3/65/L.63
26. The Chairperson said that he had been informed
that the amendment had no programme budget
implications.
27. Ms. Chan Yu Ping (Singapore), introducing the
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.23/Rev.1 on
behalf of the sponsors, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Egypt, Grenada,
Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Viet Nam, Yemen and
Zimbabwe, said that they proposed that the following
paragraph should be inserted as a new first paragraph:
“Reaffirms the sovereign right of all countries to
develop their own legal system, including determining
appropriate legal penalties, in accordance with their
obligations under international law.” The amendment
upheld the principle that, while respecting its
international obligations, every State had to choose its
own path of development. By acknowledging the right
of countries to choose their own legal penalties, the
draft resolution could finally start an international
discussion on the death penalty on the correct basis.
The sponsors’ refusal to accept that States had a choice
of policies betrayed their real goal, which was to force
a moratorium on other countries.A/C.3/65/SR.45
10-63276 6
28. When proposing the amendment, her delegation
had indicated that it was prepared to collaborate to
identify wording that would be acceptable to both
sides. While appreciating the efforts made by some
sponsors, it regretted that select groups of sponsors
were not willing to be similarly open. Her delegation
asked members of the Committee who considered that
the draft resolution was an effort to start international
dialogue on the death penalty to vote in favour of the
amendment, which acknowledged that all participants
in the dialogue had a right to their own views, and their
own choices.
29. The Chair said that Antigua and Barbuda,
Barbados, Guyana, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and
Uganda had joined the sponsors, and that the sponsors
had requested a recorded vote.
30. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) said that, although his
delegation had sponsored the draft resolution, it
considered that a greater effort should have been made
to accommodate more of the concerns expressed by
showing greater flexibility on such a sensitive issue as
the right to life. Moreover, States and Governments had
the primary responsibility for determining the legal
system applicable to their territory and population;
hence, his delegation was surprised to find itself faced
with an amendment based on an idea that it had
proposed to the original sponsors. He was therefore
suspending his delegation from the group of sponsors
pending his Government’s instructions.
31. Mr. Wetland (Norway), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights established an
incontestable link between human rights and criminal
justice, as well as protection for individuals subjected
to criminal justice systems, including in respect of trial
and punishment. The proposed amendment would
divert focus away from the human rights dimension of
the use of the death penalty. While it was the sovereign
prerogative of States to develop their own legal system
in accordance with international law, that principle did
not provide an exhaustive framework for the States’
prerogatives and obligations relevant to the resolution.
Thus the inclusion of the proposed amendment would
upset the balance of the draft text. Norway would thus
vote against the proposed amendment.
32. Mr. Errázuriz (Chile), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that, in its introduction
of the draft resolution on the moratorium on the use of
the death penalty, his delegation had already stated that
its first paragraph was guided by the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Since
national sovereignty was one of the principles of the
Charter, the proposed amendment was redundant.
Moreover, it distorted the meaning of the resolution, by
removing it from the sphere of human rights in order to
introduce it into that of national sovereignty. The draft
resolution called for a moratorium on the use of the
death penalty with a view to its ultimate abolition.
However, it was the State that had to make the final
decision and accept the corresponding responsibility.
Delegations should reflect on the irreversible and
irreparable nature of an error in the administration of
justice for the victim.
33. A recorded vote was taken on the amendment to
draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.23/Rev.1 contained in
document A/C.3/65/L.63.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,A/C.3/65/SR.45
7 10-63276
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Belize, Bhutan, Burkina Faso,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi,
Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Peru, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Samoa, Senegal,
Seychelles, South Africa, Tajikistan, Togo,
Tuvalu, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia.
34. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.63 was rejected by 79
votes to 58, with 30 abstentions.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.23/Rev.1: Moratorium on
the use of the death penalty
35. Ms. Booker (Bahamas) wished to propose an oral
amendment to paragraph 3 (d) of the draft resolution
under rule 130 of the Rules of Procedure of the General
Assembly. There was no international consensus on the
death penalty, leading some delegations to feel that a
position on the matter was being imposed on them.
Member States recognized the decision of some States
voluntarily to apply a moratorium on the use of the
death penalty. As it stood, paragraph 3 (d) prejudged
the outcome of national debates on the issue. The
words “can contribute to possible” in operative
paragraph 3 (b) implied some uncertainty as to whether
debates would be informed and transparent and would
actually lead to a moratorium. The phrase “To establish
a moratorium” should be changed to read “To consider
establishing a moratorium”.
36. Ms. Chan Yu Ping (Singapore) said that if the
draft resolution did not seek to impose the views of the
sponsors on the rest of the membership, then there was
no reason for the sponsors and the rest of the
Committee to reject the amendment. It was not an
outright deletion of the paragraph. Singapore would
vote in favour of the oral amendment.
37. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that the oral amendment
was objective, non-selective and did not impose a point
of view. It was an attempt to call on those who
considered the resolution balanced to prove that it
actually was. The amendment was in line with the
resolution, and all delegations were urged to consider it
positively.
38. Ms. Morton (New Zealand) said that her
delegation was opposed to the oral amendment.
Paragraph 3 (d) contained the very purpose of the draft
resolution. Any amendment to it would go against its
spirit. Paragraph 3 had already been changed to address
concerns about selectivity. It was the undeniable
intention of the sponsors to call upon States to
establish a moratorium on the death penalty.
39. Ms. Robles (Spain) requested a recorded vote.
The proposed oral amendment ran counter to the
central objective of the draft resolution. Paragraph 3 (d)
was the crux of the draft resolution, summarizing its
primary purpose, which was to call upon all States to
establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty,
leading to its abolition. Preambular paragraphs 4 and 5
referred to the irreversibility of the death penalty in
cases of miscarriage of justice and the lack of evidence
of the deterrent value of the death penalty. There was
no reason to introduce an amendment, as draft
resolutions urging a moratorium had already been
adopted in 2007 and 2008.
40. Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana) said that his
delegation supported the oral amendment proposed by
Bahamas, which was very progressive.
41. Ms. Riley (Barbados) said that the language of
the oral amendment reflected a flexibility with which it
would be difficult to disagree.
42. A recorded vote on the oral amendment to
paragraph 3 (d) of draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.23/
Rev.1 was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Namibia, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent andA/C.3/65/SR.45
10-63276 8
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Kenya, Lebanon, Liberia, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Peru,
Republic of Korea, Samoa, Senegal, Seychelles,
Tajikistan, Tuvalu, United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia.
43. The proposed oral amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.23/Rev.1 was rejected by 82 votes to 54,
with 29 abstentions.
44. Ms. Wilson (Jamaica) said that each Member
State had the right to determine whether or not it would
apply the death penalty. That was a matter of State
sovereignty and self-determination. Jamaica was
guided by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the Charter of the United Nations and its belief that
countries had the inalienable right to choose their
political and cultural systems without interference in
any form by another Member State. Countries that
opposed the death penalty did not have the right to
impose their views on other countries. Member States
should refrain from passing resolutions that amounted
to interference in the domestic affairs of other States.
45. International law allowed States to decide the
matter. The International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, for example, affirmed the right to life,
but avoided the suggestion that the death penalty was a
violation of international law. The basic premise of
article 6, paragraph 2, of the Covenant was that the
death penalty was compatible with international law if
carried out in compliance with certain conditions. The
Second Optional Protocol to the Covenant aimed to
abolish the death penalty. If a State ratified it, it was
going in a clear direction. The converse was also true.
It was for Jamaica to decide whether or not the death
penalty might act as a deterrent in its particular
circumstances.
46. Jamaica would vote against the draft resolution,
which was sponsored mainly by European States. It
was an attempt to impose the will of some countries on
others.
47. Mr. Gonsalves (St. Vincent and the Grenadines)
said that the death penalty had been bequeathed to his
country in its Constitution, which came from its former
colonizer, the United Kingdom. The legality of the law
on the death penalty had been affirmed and reaffirmed,
including by the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council of the United Kingdom. Polls and public
consultations showed that the death penalty was
supported by an overwhelming majority of citizens.
48. The draft resolution was a peculiar expression of
cultural, political and legal insensitivity and
demonstrated scant regard for the Charter of the United
Nations and for State sovereignty. Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines took no issue with those States that had
abolished or mothballed the death penalty. Many of the
sponsors had a recent history of arbitrary and
capricious misapplication, which may have led to
public revulsion for the death penalty and resulted in
its abolition. Such heinous misapplication was foreign
to his country’s experience. Each country must decide
the issue without the interference of well-meaning but
misguided outsiders.A/C.3/65/SR.45
9 10-63276
49. If, as had been said, the world was witnessing
rapid movement towards a universal moratorium on the
death penalty, then it was taking place without the
assistance of the draft resolution. For those basking in
the self-congratulatory glow of their own recent
rejection of the death penalty, it might seem
unfathomable that not everyone agreed with them.
50. His country and others like it, which had
superlative human rights records, had decided to retain
the death penalty. Passage of the resolution would set
an unfortunate precedent.
51. Mr. Ali (Sudan) said that the draft resolution was
inconsistent with the United Nations Charter and other
international instruments. Although the amendments
proposed by the Sudan and certain other States had
been rejected, the fact that so many States had voted in
favour of those amendments demonstrated that the
death penalty remained a highly controversial issue.
52. Decisions on the use of the death penalty fell
within the national jurisdiction of States, which
enjoyed the sovereign right freely to choose their own
socio-economic, cultural and judicial systems, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter. The Sudan
respected the views of States that, pursuant to debate at
the domestic level, had abolished the death penalty or
imposed a moratorium on its use; the views of States
that still applied that penalty for specific serious and
dangerous crimes must, likewise, be respected.
Moreover, attempts by certain States to impose their
views on others, by means of highly controversial
General Assembly resolutions, would not be
successful.
53. As the sponsors of the draft resolution had failed
to address its concerns, the Sudan would be compelled
to vote against it.
54. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) said that although his
delegation believed that the debate on the draft
resolution had detracted from the work of the
Committee, the process had been conducted in a
positive way. He welcomed the recognition of ongoing
national debates on the death penalty in the draft
resolution, as each society must make its own decisions
regarding criminal justice matters, at its own pace and
free from outside pressure. In Malaysia, the death
penalty was carried out only after all legal remedies
were exhausted and could only be decreed by the
highest courts for the most serious crimes.
Furthermore, the legal framework required compliance
with the strictest safeguards before the death penalty
was carried out. The Government was currently
considering amendments to reduce the penalties for
offences that carried the death penalty, including drug-
trafficking crimes.
55. While the approach to the debate in the
Committee had improved, it was clear that there was
no consensus on the issue, and that the focus of the
debate in any given country varied greatly depending
on the national legal status of capital punishment. The
draft resolution did not recognize those differences and
was unbalanced in its singular focus on imposing a
moratorium. His delegation had proposed amendments
to balance the text in a spirit of constructive dialogue,
including by proposing language to encourage national
debates to continue, and was disappointed that all of
those amendments had been rejected. If a resolution on
the death penalty was in fact needed in the General
Assembly, in the interest of authentic change, such a
resolution must not marginalize groups of countries. If
such a resolution would acknowledge the diversity in
national debates, recognize the right of countries to
choose their criminal justice system and urge States to
provide safeguards in the imposition of the death
penalty, consensus on the measure would be possible,
even if countries were asked to consider a moratorium
on the death penalty. The fact that the draft resolution
ignored the broad scope of the question demonstrated
that it sought to impose the values of some countries
on all. Although his delegation had considered all
options on the draft resolution, it had no choice but to
vote against it.
56. Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda), recalling that one
of the proposed amendments had made reference to
State sovereignty, said that all of the sponsors of the
draft resolution were individual and sovereign States.
He urged the delegations present to reconsider the list
of sponsors and recognize that it included countries
from all regions of the world that shared similar
convictions regarding human dignity, not just members
of the European Union. He invited all Member States
to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
57. Ms. Abubakar (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that the draft resolution was an attempt by some States
to impose their views and legislation on others.
Furthermore, it violated the sovereignty of States, as
enshrined in the United Nations Charter and other
international instruments. The death penalty neitherA/C.3/65/SR.45
10-63276 10
violated human rights nor international law. In Libya it
was handed down for specific offences by special
courts and was only carried out when all means of
recourse or appeal had been exhausted.
58. The right to life was sacred. If the sponsors of the
draft resolution were genuinely concerned about that
right, they must speak out against the killing of people
living under foreign occupation and make every effort
to resolve conflicts that had caused the deaths of
millions.
59. Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that her
Government held the question of capital punishment to
be a criminal justice matter which fell under the
national jurisdiction of States. In Trinidad and Tobago,
the death penalty was applied only for the crimes of
murder and treason and carried out through due
process. The Government therefore did not view the
application of the death penalty as inconsistent with its
obligations under the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. While her delegation appreciated
the sponsors’ attempts to accommodate some of the
concerns raised regarding the contents of the draft
resolution, it affirmed that the text as a whole was
inconsistent with the Charter, as it encroached on the
sovereign right of Member States to determine
appropriate legal penalties, in accordance with their
own needs to maintain security and peace. Her
delegation would therefore vote against the draft
resolution.
60. Ms. Chan (Singapore), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that in the course of
considering the draft resolution, the Committee had
chosen to reject language from the Charter and had
refused to acknowledge the simple fact that some
countries retained the death penalty in their legislation
for the most serious crimes. Furthermore, it had
implied that the sovereign right of States to determine
their own legal penalties was somehow dangerous by
refusing to make that right explicit in the draft
resolution. The Committee had also continued to
disrespect countries that retained the death penalty by
voting against an amendment that would allow them to
simply consider imposing a moratorium.
61. While the draft resolution itself urged national
debate on the issue of the death penalty, in their
actions, the sponsors had not shown tolerance for
diversity or respect for the freedom of expression, a
principle they often held dear. In the absence of
consensus, the opinions of some countries should not
be imposed on all. Countries that retained the death
penalty, including Singapore, did not seek to impose
that position on all; they requested the same respect
from others. Adopting a draft resolution by sheer
numbers was not a way to change a State’s position on
an issue. When the Universal Declaration on Human
Rights had been adopted in 1948, 15 European
countries and many other sponsors of the draft
resolution had been implementing the death penalty
and had signed the Declaration with the understanding
that it was not a human rights issue. They now sought
to deny others that same choice, which amounted to a
cynical application of double standards. Her delegation
would therefore vote against the draft resolution.
62. Mr. Al-Shami (Yemen), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that a moratorium on the
death penalty required broad international consensus,
which did not currently exist. The death penalty was a
criminal justice matter; it was not a human rights issue
and did not violate international law. Every State had
the irrevocable right to establish its own system of
justice without being subjected to foreign interference.
Along with the delegations of other States that shared
its convictions, the delegation of Yemen had negotiated
on the draft resolution in good faith and had shown
great flexibility. Yemen believed strongly that disputes
were best resolved through dialogue and regretted the
fact that certain States had voted against the proposed
amendments. Any action taken by States with a view to
imposing their values and views on others would only
serve to increase tension and exacerbate disputes.
Yemen would thus vote against the draft resolution.
63. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
draft resolution clearly interfered in the internal affairs
of States and was therefore inconsistent with the
United Nations Charter. The key issue under discussion
was not the death penalty per se, but State sovereignty.
The death penalty was a criminal justice and not a
human rights issue. The rights of the victims of crime
must be safeguarded; instead of strengthening respect
for human rights, abolition of the death penalty would
serve to weaken it. Syria would therefore vote against
the draft resolution.
64. Mr. Vimal (India), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that article 6, paragraph 2,
of the International Covenant on Civil and PoliticalA/C.3/65/SR.45
11 10-63276
Rights only made reference to the “desirability” of
abolishing the death penalty. In India, the death penalty
was exercised very rarely, for heinous crimes that
shocked the conscience of society. Furthermore, in
those cases, the legal framework provided the requisite
procedural safeguards, including the right to a fair
hearing, presumption of innocence, guarantees of
defence and the right to review by a higher court.
Legislation also provided for suspension of the death
penalty for pregnant women and juvenile offenders and
for pardons by the President and governors of states.
The draft resolution went against statutory law in
India, as it sought to abolish the death penalty by
promoting a moratorium on executions, and his
delegation would therefore vote against it.
65. Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that his
delegation appreciated the efforts made by the sponsors
to respond to concerns raised during consultations on
the draft resolution. There had been a de facto
moratorium on the death penalty in Morocco since
1993, and the Government was already in compliance
with the measures called for in paragraph 3 (b) and (c)
of the draft resolution. A policy was in place to
facilitate communication of information related to
executions, and the Penal Code was in the process of
being revised in order to reduce the number of offences
for which the death penalty could be applied. For those
reasons, and given that capital punishment was still the
subject of debate in Moroccan society, his delegation
would abstain from voting, and would continue to
engage in dialogue with the sponsors.
66. Ms. Phipps (United States of America), speaking
in explanation of vote before the voting, said that her
delegation had appreciated the sponsors’ attempts to
promote international dialogue. While her delegation
recognized that the draft resolution presented the
policy objectives of countries advocating the abolition
of the death penalty, it affirmed that any decision on
the matter must be made through the democratic
domestic procedures of Member States, consistent with
their obligations under international law. The death
penalty was in fact permitted under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights when imposed
for the most serious crimes and enacted in accordance
with appropriate procedural safeguards. The United
States had clear legislation in place as to how the death
penalty was carried out, which included an amendment
in the Constitution that prohibited methods of
execution constituting cruel and unusual punishment.
All such protections were guaranteed at the federal and
state level. Furthermore, the Supreme Court had
limited the types of individuals and the kinds of
offences to which the death penalty was applicable.
Her delegation urged other States to strive to apply the
death penalty in compliance with international law,
including by ensuring due process guarantees;
conducting a review of the types of crimes and
individuals subject to capital punishment; prohibiting
methods that inflicted undue suffering; and preventing
executions conducted in an extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary manner. She particularly urged those
Governments that supported the draft resolution to turn
their focus towards addressing human rights violations
committed through the improper application of the
death penalty.
67. Ms. Zhang Dan (China), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that her delegation
would vote against the draft resolution, which
concerned a matter within the sovereign responsibility
of individual States. She pointed out that both the
discussion and the adoption of a resolution on the death
penalty ran counter to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations on non-interference in the internal
affairs of States and would not change the position
which countries held on the issue; instead, it served
only to divide them further.
68. Attempting to push through a moratorium on an
issue on which there was still no consensus in the
international community was not conducive to a
healthy and balanced dialogue and would only increase
mistrust between the various constituencies. China
respected the right of each country to choose
appropriate penalties for offenders in accordance with
its judicial imperatives, level of development and
historical and cultural background and urged the
sponsors of the draft to take a more balanced approach,
to respect the sovereignty of other States and to refrain
from politicizing the issue of the death penalty.
69. Ms. Andamo (Thailand), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that her delegation had
supported all of the proposed amendments to the text,
as the Government of Thailand considered the death
penalty to be a criminal justice issue that fell within
every State’s sovereign right to decide its own penal
code. In Thailand, a national debate had been sparked
by the recent introduction of the National Human
Rights Plan, which included a component on the death
penalty. In order to reflect those developments, her
delegation had adjusted its position and would be
abstaining in the vote, instead of voting against the
draft resolution. She urged the sponsors to make aA/C.3/65/SR.45
10-63276 12
sincere attempt to include the perspectives of the entire
United Nations membership by bridging the gaps that
had been left in the draft resolution when presenting
such a measure in the future.
70. Mr. Monterrey Suay (El Salvador) said that his
delegation wished to join the sponsors.
71. Mr. Selim (Egypt), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that his delegation’s
sincere attempts to improve the language in the draft
resolution had not been heeded. It was ironic that some
delegations had rejected the inclusion of language from
the Charter, when they themselves introduced selective
quotations from international instruments when it
suited their objectives in other resolutions, even adding
their own interpretations to that language. The
sponsors ignored the fact that the draft resolution itself
was selective in its scope and contents. His delegation
had hoped that the Committee would have respected
the great diversity in societies and acknowledged that
not all rules were suitable in all societies at all times.
Some delegations had claimed that there was a trend
towards abolishing the death penalty worldwide. He
questioned that claim, given that so many delegations
had voted to include an amendment affirming the right
of States to maintain the death penalty for the most
serious crimes. It seemed the real trend was for some to
impose their perceptions of an issue, without
consideration of the concerns voiced by delegations on
the other side. He wondered to what purpose
international cooperation was undermined through the
systematic imposition of standards under the guise of
democratic principles. His delegation would vote
against the draft resolution.
72. Ms. Hoang Thi Thang Nga (Viet Nam), speaking
in explanation of vote before the voting, said that her
delegation would abstain in the vote on the draft
resolution. Application of the death penalty was a
judicial question and should not be part of human
rights discussions. All States had the sovereign right to
choose their own legal system, and no country could
impose its views on others regarding matters of
national jurisdiction, including in the Third Committee.
The Government of Viet Nam had been reducing the
number of offences for which the death penalty was
applied. In addition, the Penal Code protected pregnant
women and juveniles from application of the death
penalty.
73. Ms. Medal (Nicaragua), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that her delegation
wished to join as a sponsor and would be voting in
favour of the draft resolution. In line with the second
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, her Government had
abolished capital punishment in the Constitution. Her
delegation hoped that some of the amendments to the
draft resolution that had been rejected would be
considered in future discussions of such a resolution
for the sake of greater consensus.
74. Ms. Richter (Maldives), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that although Maldives
had voted against the resolution in the past, in
acknowledgement of the fact that it had the second
longest moratorium on the death penalty, it would be
voting in favour of the draft resolution.
75. At the request of the delegation of Singapore, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.23/Rev.1.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-
Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Against:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,A/C.3/65/SR.45
13 10-63276
China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, United States of America,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Bahrain, Belarus, Cameroon,
Comoros, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, Fiji, Ghana, Guinea,
Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi,
Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Oman,
Papua New Guinea, Republic of Korea, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands,
Suriname, Thailand, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia.
76. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.23/Rev.1 was adopted
by 107 votes to 39, with 36 abstentions.
77. Mr. Kimura (Japan), speaking in explanation of
vote after the voting, said that Japan had voted against
the draft resolution because it considered that it was for
each Member State to make decisions concerning the
death penalty, including the establishment of a
moratorium on executions or the abolition, retention or
re-introduction of the death penalty. Such decisions
should be based on careful consideration of all the
relevant factors, including public opinion, the national
situation and the trend in serious crimes for which the
death penalty might be applied, and the need for a
holistic approach to national criminal justice policy.
78. The retention of the death penalty for those who
committed serious crimes was supported by an
overwhelming majority of the Japanese public, and the
Government respected public opinion. Furthermore, no
international consensus existed on the abolition of the
death penalty. It was therefore regrettable that the
sponsors had decided to table the resolution calling on
States to establish a moratorium on executions with a
view to abolishing the death penalty, even though the
focus in the draft resolution on abolition of the death
penalty faced strong opposition from many States that
retained capital punishment.
79. Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), speaking in
explanation of vote on behalf of his delegation and also
on behalf of Qatar and Saudi Arabia, said that the draft
resolution constituted blatant interference in the
internal affairs of States and violated the right of each
State to devise its own criminal justice framework. It
thus violated the sovereignty of States as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. Kuwait, Qatar and
Saudi Arabia had therefore voted against the draft
resolution.
80. Mr. Hussain (Bangladesh), speaking in
explanation of vote after the voting, said that
Bangladesh had provisions regarding the death penalty
in its criminal justice system, but restricted capital
punishment to the most heinous crimes. Its legal
system had adequate safeguards in place to avoid
miscarriages of justice; extreme caution was exercised
at all stages, and there were adequate measures of
redress. A moratorium that ultimately sought the total
abolition of the death penalty, as envisaged in the draft
resolution, would require a comprehensive appraisal of
criminal justice systems worldwide, but since that had
not been proposed, Bangladesh had voted against the
draft resolution.
81. Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana), speaking in
explanation of vote after the voting, said that Botswana
had voted against the draft resolution and wished to
record its disappointment with the rejection of the
amendments submitted in an attempt to create balance
in its content. Botswana would continue to vote against
the draft resolution for as long as the sponsors failed to
take into account that, for many countries, the death
penalty was not a human rights issue, but one related to
the criminal justice system. Hence, linking the death
penalty to human rights was totally unacceptable to
Botswana and other delegations. Moreover, since it
was a criminal justice issue, it would be misleading to
suggest that the abolition of the death penalty
contributed to the protection and promotion of human
rights. While respecting the decision of countries that
had abolished the death penalty or instituted a
moratorium, Botswana regretted that the sponsors had
shown no inclination to respect the choice of those
countries that retained capital punishment in their legal
system for perpetrators of serious crimes. The death
penalty was not proscribed by international law.
Botswana was proud of its record of sustained
democracy and respect for the rule of law and
fundamental rights of the individual as guaranteed by
the Constitution, and to state that its population was
fully in support of retaining the death penalty.
Botswana remained open to continue debating the issue
on the basis of the sovereign equality of the Member
States of the United Nations.A/C.3/65/SR.45
10-63276 14
82. Ms. Sodov (Mongolia), speaking in explanation
of vote after the voting, said that, in the past, Mongolia
had invariably voted against the draft resolution,
because its Criminal Code and other relevant laws
established the death penalty. However, earlier in the
year, the President had declared a moratorium on the
use of the death penalty by virtue of his constitutional
authority to grant pardon. The Government had then
submitted the proposal to accede to the Second
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights to Parliament, with the aim
of abolishing the death penalty. Consequently,
Mongolia had voted in favour of the draft resolution.
83. Mr. Wangchuk (Bhutan), speaking in
explanation of vote after the voting, said that, even
though the death penalty had been abolished by royal
decree in 2004, Bhutan had abstained from voting on
the draft resolution in the past in recognition of the
right of States to determine their own criminal justice
system. The royal decree had been incorporated into
the 2008 Constitution, which represented the will of
the people, and Bhutan had therefore voted in favour of
the draft resolution.
84. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) said that, as a traditional
sponsor of the draft resolution, Switzerland had again
voted in favour of the establishment of a moratorium
on the use of the death penalty, demonstrating its
commitment to its abolition worldwide, a priority in
the context of its human rights policy. Nevertheless, it
regretted that the draft resolution had not included a
paragraph embodying the principle of a global
exchange of views on the death penalty, within the
United Nations, to have followed the national
discussions on the question referred to in the draft
resolution. Switzerland hoped that a true dialogue
could be held within the United Nations in the near
future. Lastly, it welcomed the fact that the final vote
confirmed the tendency towards the abolition of the
death penalty worldwide.
85. Mr. Andrade (Brazil) said that Brazil welcomed
the adoption of the draft resolution because it
emphasized the importance of promoting human rights.
Significant progress had been in the dialogue on the
death penalty among all Member States, which had
enabled them to adopt a more balanced text. Dialogue
would also lead to a better understanding of the
different positions, and would help States work
together towards abolishing the death penalty. Brazil
hoped that the more constructive atmosphere achieved
could be retained when consideration resumed in two
years’ time and emphasized the importance of
transparent consultations to achieve a resolution with
the broadest possible support.
86. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that although Egypt had
voted against the resolution, it strongly believed that,
in all States which retained the death penalty, it could
only be imposed by a competent court of law and
respecting due process. International efforts should
focus on strengthening international commitment to
ensure that no one was arbitrarily deprived of life.
Egypt firmly believed that the draft resolution not only
tried to reinterpret provisions of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in the light of
developments in the national legislation of certain
countries, but also sought to impose new
interpretations and restrictive approaches on the
general membership that advanced the standards of a
select few hiding behind cross-regional numbers.
87. The draft resolution dealt with only one aspect of
the right to life, representing yet another facet of the
selectivity that Members States had pledged to avoid
when they established the Human Rights Council. That
selectivity was revealed by the choice of the
international norms highlighted in the resolution, and
how certain parts of articles were used to justify the
approach of a select core group. Moreover, the draft
resolution overlooked the fact that any changes to or
interpretations of a negotiated legal instrument should
only be made through the same negotiation process,
and no single interpretation should be forced on the
international community. All resolutions must adhere
to international law and human rights instruments.
Attempts to selectively ignore well-established
principles in the draft resolution in question while
upholding others revealed the flagrant application of
double standards, and would create an unfortunate
precedent in international law, detrimental to common
efforts to promote the universal respect and
implementation of human rights law. Egypt strongly
believed that the diverging human rights arguments
could only be reconciled through a comprehensive
process of debate at the multilateral level.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.