United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.48
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
19 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-64244 (E)
*1064244*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 48th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 18 November 2010, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
Agenda item 63: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 66: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)A/C.3/65/SR.48
10-64244 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of
human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/65/L.49)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.49: Situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Andorra, Croatia, Micronesia (Federated States of)
and Palau had become sponsors.
3. Mr. Larijanei (Islamic Republic of Iran)
proposed a motion of no action on the draft resolution
under rule 116 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly. Country situations should be discussed in
the context of the universal periodic review rather than
in the Third Committee. His country had just
completed the universal periodic review. Experts in the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
had noted that the recent universal periodic review of
Iran had been one of the most successful so far. Of
some 190 recommendations, 160 had been immediately
adopted and 20 were being further considered. Of those
20, 15 had been approved. In contrast, the United
States of America had not accepted a single one of the
220 recommendations made when it had undergone the
same process.
4. Six Special Rapporteurs had visited Iran, and two
more were scheduled to visit in the near future. The
High Commissioner for Human Rights was also
planning a visit. It would be difficult to imagine a
clearer indication of human rights cooperation.
5. The Chair read out rule 116 of the General
Assembly’s rules of procedure.
6. Ms. Méndez Romero (Venezuela, Bolivarian
Republic of), speaking in support of the motion, said
that country-specific resolutions were politically
motivated and had nothing to do with human rights. All
countries had the opportunity to undergo the universal
periodic review, which was just and balanced. Thus,
consideration of the draft resolution in the Third
Committee and the General Assembly was unjustified.
Such resolutions should be definitively removed from
the agenda. The proposal weakened the principles of
impartiality and non-selectivity.
7. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) said that his
delegation was concerned that recurring technical
problems with translation equipment were impeding
the work of General Assembly Committees. Those
problems also distracted some delegates when key
issues were being debated or voted upon and must be
investigated.
8. Many countries believed that, by continuing to
criticize the human rights records of certain Member
States, while ignoring the records of others, the
Committee had proved itself to be a body that dealt
with key issues in a selective and politicized manner. It
was on that basis, and for procedural reasons, that the
Syrian delegation supported the no action motion.
9. There was broad consensus that the human rights
records of all Member States must be reviewed by the
Human Rights Council. However, in an attempt to
exploit the issue of human rights for political ends,
certain Member States continued to call for the human
rights records of certain specific States to be addressed
at United Nations Headquarters. Syria deplored those
efforts. Human rights issues must not be exploited for
political ends and must be addressed in an impartial
and non-selective manner.
10. Mr. McNee (Canada), speaking against the
motion, said that the General Assembly had conferred
upon the Third Committee the task of recommending
action on human rights. Therefore, serious human
rights concerns must be discussed in the Committee
wherever they arose. Supporters of the no action
motion wished to deny the members of the Third
Committee the opportunity for debate and discussion.
11. In the draft resolution on Iran during the previous
session, the Committee had called for a report of the
Secretary-General. It would be highly unusual for the
Committee to prevent itself from considering a report
that it had requested, yet a no action motion would
have that effect. In adopting the motion, the Third
Committee would be contradicting and undermining
itself and the work of the Secretary-General. The Third
Committee had the right and the duty to consider
human rights issues on their merits and to stand up to
those who would stifle debate.
12. Mr. Pálsson (Iceland), also speaking in
opposition to the motion on behalf of Andorra,A/C.3/65/SR.48
3 10-64244
Argentina, Austria, Liechtenstein, Palau and San
Marino, said that the General Assembly had given the
Third Committee the responsibility of addressing
human rights issues. The motion would prevent
fulfilment of that mandate. Human rights were not the
exclusive purview of the Human Rights Council and
the universal periodic review. To preclude discussion
of human rights in the Third Committee would
undermine the credibility of the Third Committee and
the General Assembly. Every serious human rights
issue put before the Committee should be considered
on its merits.
13. A recorded vote was taken on the motion to
adjourn the debate on draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.49.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Central African
Republic, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gambia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan,
Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte
d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi,
Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Philippines, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, South Africa, Togo, United Republic
of Tanzania, Zambia.
14. The motion to adjourn the debate on draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.49 was rejected by 91 votes to
51, with 32 abstentions.
15. Mr. McNee (Canada) said that the human rights
situation in Iran had continued to deteriorate since the
Third Committee’s adoption of a resolution on the
situation of human rights in that country during the
previous session. While all countries faced human
rights challenges, the Government of Iran made no
effort to protect its citizens’ human rights and
manifested a lack of respect for the United Nations and
its human rights treaties and procedures.
16. The report of the Secretary-General on the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran referred to “further negative developments in the
human rights situation in Iran”. The Government
continued to employ such practices as stoning, torture,
amputation, flogging, execution by strangulation and
execution of children. Its discrimination against
minority groups amounted to persecution. The draft
resolution called on the Government of Iran to fully
respect its human rights obligations, consider ratifying
international human rights instruments and receive the
special procedures mandate holders. The Third
Committee should give Iranians the voice that had been
denied them.
17. Ms. Gendi (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that human
rights issues should be dealt with by means of a
cooperative, non-confrontational approach based onA/C.3/65/SR.48
10-64244 4
enhancing States’ capacities and providing resources
for countries to meet their human rights obligations.
The universal periodic review had been established to
eliminate selectivity, politicization and double
standards.
18. The Non-Aligned Movement emphasized the role
of the Human Rights Council as the United Nations
organ responsible for consideration of human rights
situations in all countries. At the fifteenth Summit of
the Non-Aligned Movement in July 2009, Heads of
State and Government had expressed deep concern
with regard to country-specific resolutions in the Third
Committee, which undermined cooperation. The
universal periodic review was impartial, transparent,
constructive, non-confrontational and non-politicized.
There was no need to create a parallel track to the
Human Rights Council in the Third Committee. The
country-specific draft resolutions targeted developing
countries only. Country-specific resolutions ran
counter to global governance, the theme of the session
which had been selected by the President of the
General Assembly. The sponsors of such resolutions
were confident that developing countries would not be
able to submit similar ones targeting the developed
countries.
19. Mr. Larijanei (Islamic Republic of Iran) said
that the draft resolution was a continuation of a
malicious trend that would harm international peace
and inflict serious damage on the credibility of the
United Nations. Although Canada and the European
Union were sponsors, the United States of America was
the mastermind and main provocateur. The draft
resolution had nothing to do with human rights but was
part of the hostile policy of the United States against
Iran.
20. Canada had voted against a draft resolution
condemning killings by Israel in Gaza. Canada itself
had a dismal record on minorities. There was a clear
double standard at work. The draft resolution was
astonishingly unprofessional and full of fallacies and
baseless, unverifiable allegations.
21. The draft resolution referred to the death penalty
for crimes which lacked a precise definition, including
moharabeh (enmity against God). In fact, the concept
of moharabeh was at the core of the legal concept for
fighting terrorism, which was the obligation of all
nations. How could countries be justified in engaging
in all-out war to combat terrorism while questioning
Iran’s effort to uproot terrorism?
22. The United States, the European Union, the
United Kingdom, France and Germany were the main
supporters of terrorism in Iran. Ruthless organizations
such as Party for a Free Life in Kurdistan (PJAK), the
Mujahidin-e Khalq (MKO) and the Rigi gang all
enjoyed financial and logistical support from those
countries. The leaders of those criminal groups, who
were responsible for the deaths of many innocent
people in Iran, were frequent visitors to the United
States Congress, the German Bundestag and the
Parliaments of France and the United Kingdom. The
draft resolution should be rejected outright by those
who did not support terrorist activity.
23. One of the greatest rewards of the Islamic
Revolution had been the creation of a democratic order.
Iran was the greatest democracy in the Middle East and
had the greatest achievements in science and
technology in the region. As a result, Iran, like Canada,
produced fuel for nuclear reactors. It was number one
in stem cell research and cloning technology in the
region. Women occupied more than 65 per cent of
university seats in Iran. Illiteracy had been eradicated.
The sole crime of Iran was that its democracy was not
a replica of Western democracy. Iran did not wish to be
a Western democracy.
24. Protests were to be expected in democratic
societies. There were massive daily protests in the
United States and Western Europe. In recent years
there had been enormous protests in Los Angeles.
People had been killed, police beaten and shops and
homes set on fire. Earlier in 2010, Paris had been like a
war zone due to demonstrations. It was probably not
possible to have democracy without protests, nor was it
possible to prevent violence in all cases.
25. Bizarrely, the draft resolution criticized Iran for
not carrying out investigations of the demonstrations of
June 2009 after the presidential election. In fact,
thorough investigations had been carried out and the
results had shown that the protests had been funded by
the United States Government. The United States had
trained protestors and agitated to increase participation,
leading and misleading people while doing so. People
had been trained in camps, armed and dispatched into
Iran to commit violence, and the United Kingdom had
mobilized the media blitz against Iran. Neda
Agha-Soltan, the young woman whose death hadA/C.3/65/SR.48
5 10-64244
attracted international attention, had in fact been killed
by a British intelligence agent. France had sent agents
to the University of Teheran, where it had trained
students to organize protests against the State. The
Ambassador of Germany had also played a significant
role in the unrest in Teheran.
26. A great cover-up had been carried out. The
Western powers had in fact no interest in human rights.
27. The draft resolution was unhealthy and
dangerous. Double standards and selectivity based on
political considerations were no longer exceptions in
the tabling of country-specific resolutions. Gross,
massive human rights violations in some parts of the
world were simply overlooked. The sponsors of the
draft resolution themselves lacked defensible human
rights records. Canada, for example, had a poor human
rights record, especially with respect to migrants,
minorities and indigenous people.
28. The saddest irony was that Israel, a country
whose very founding had involved the worst forms of
human rights violations, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and mass murder, figured among the sponsors. The
United States, also a sponsor, had the worst human
rights record in history.
29. The policy of introducing a resolution against
Iran did a disservice to the Iranian policy of openness
and cooperation. The Committee was urged to lend no
credence to the unfair, baseless claims contained in the
resolution.
30. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that there
was broad international consensus that the Human
Rights Council should periodically review the human
rights situation of each Member State on an equitable
basis, that human rights issues must be dealt with in a
non-politicized manner and that international
cooperation mechanisms must be developed in order to
promote and protect those rights globally. A selective
and politicized approach to human rights undermined
any progress achieved by the international community
in that regard. Moreover, employing double standards
adversely affected the deliberations of the Human
Rights Council and increased tension between States.
31. The credibility of the draft resolution was
severely undermined by the fact that Israel was one of
its sponsors. Syria deplored the fact that certain States
that usually voted against Israeli human rights abuses
in the Occupied Arab Territories had joined the
sponsors. It was astonishing that those States had sided
with Israel against Iran. Syria urged its friends on the
list of sponsors to resist the politicization of human
rights issues. Syria would vote against the draft
resolution and would continue to strive to promote
equality and foster a spirit of cooperation, rather than
confrontation.
32. Mr. Noziri (Tajikistan), speaking on behalf of
Member States of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, said that those States opposed the practice
of submitting country-specific resolutions on human
rights that deliberately targeted Islamic and developing
countries for political ends. Furthermore, those draft
resolutions politicized the work of human rights
bodies.
33. Iran had cooperated fully with the Human Rights
Council, had recently submitted three periodic reports
to United Nations treaty bodies and had signed the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. It was regrettable that, despite Iran’s
cooperation with the United Nations human rights
mechanisms and positive developments in the field of
human rights in the country, the draft resolution had
been submitted to the Committee. All States were
therefore urged to oppose the draft resolution.
34. Mr. Ali (Sudan) said that the human rights
situation in specific countries must be addressed
through the Human Rights Council’s universal periodic
review mechanism and not by the Committee, which
should not seek to duplicate the Council’s work. His
country welcomed Iran’s cooperation with the Council,
which had commended Iran on positive developments
that had occurred in the field of human rights and had
welcomed its willingness to adopt Council
recommendations. The Sudan deplored the fact that,
while turning a blind eye to human rights violations in
other parts of the world, the sponsors had submitted the
draft resolution on Iran for political ends and to impose
certain values on Iran especially with regard to
religious and cultural issues. The Sudan would vote
against the draft resolution and reaffirmed its
conviction that dialogue was the only effective means
to address and strengthen human rights.
35. Ms. Herrera (Cuba) said that her country
strongly opposed resolutions that blatantly targeted
specific developing countries for political endsA/C.3/65/SR.48
10-64244 6
completely unrelated to the defence of human rights.
Double standards and efforts to politicize human rights
issues had discredited the former Human Rights
Commission. Protecting and promoting human rights
could only be achieved through international
cooperation based on dialogue. By fully cooperating
with the Human Rights Council, Iran had demonstrated
that it was fully committed to constructive engagement.
Cuba would vote against the draft resolution, which
was highly politicized and undermined international
cooperation.
36. Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela), in explanation of vote before the voting,
said that her country firmly rejected the ongoing
practice of condemning specific States on the basis of
their human rights records. Certain draft resolutions
were proposed in order to promote some States’
political interests rather than human rights. Moreover,
States that sponsored those resolutions also committed
human rights violations, yet, in a clear application of
double standards, no draft resolutions criticizing their
human rights records were ever put before the
Committee. The sponsors and supporters of the draft
resolution had no moral authority to set themselves up
as a world court that judged others. Human rights
issues must, instead, be considered by the Human
Rights Council, which undertook impartial and
non-selective reviews of human rights in all parts of
the world, regardless of whether or not that was
inconvenient to powerful and imperialistic States. Any
measures taken by the United Nations in the field of
human rights must be based on the principles of
respectful dialogue, impartiality, non-selectivity and
non-politicization. Venezuela would therefore vote
against the draft resolution.
37. Ms. Abubakar (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that her country was gravely concerned that, on the
pretext of promoting human rights, some countries
were attempting to impose their ideologies and politics
on others and were using human rights issues to further
their political agendas. Violations of human rights
could occur in all States and no country had a
blameless human rights record. The Human Rights
Council was the only appropriate forum in which
human rights could be addressed in an impartial and
non-politicized manner. To promote and protect those
rights, the international community must adopt an
approach based on mutual respect and dialogue and
which took States’ cultural, social and religious
dimensions into account. In view of its firm
commitment to the principles of non-selectivity and
non-interference, Libya would vote against the draft
resolution. That did not mean, however, that Libya in
any way condoned human rights violations.
38. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.49.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Vanuatu.
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Eritrea, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritania,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Senegal, Somalia, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Benin,
Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi,A/C.3/65/SR.48
7 10-64244
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Paraguay, Philippines,
Republic of Korea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, South Africa, Suriname, Swaziland,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia.
39. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.49 was adopted by
80 votes to 44, with 57 abstentions.
40. Ms. Riley (Barbados), speaking in explanation of
vote, said that her country’s position on country-
specific resolutions on human rights remained
unchanged. Barbados remained highly concerned about
the highly political and divisive nature of the debate
surrounding those resolutions and the selective
targeting of certain Member States. That approach was
neither constructive nor productive. It was through
cooperation and dialogue rather than condemnation and
isolation that progress in the field of human rights
would be achieved and to that end, the Human Rights
Council must be the forum in which the United Nations
addressed human rights issues.
41. Mr. Kodama (Japan), speaking in explanation of
vote, said that, although his country welcomed Iran’s
commitment to improving its human rights record,
Japan had voted in favour of the resolution on the
grounds that further improvement was required. Japan
remained very concerned about restrictions imposed by
Iran on fundamental rights and freedoms, its treatment
of detainees and the execution of persons who, at the
time of their offences, had been under 18 years of age.
However, Japan also commended Iran for signing the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict as well as the Government’s agreement to
accept the recommendations of the Human Rights
Council under the universal periodic review. Japan
hoped that Iran would follow up on those
recommendations and would continue to engage in
dialogue on human rights with Japan and the
international community. It had therefore declined to
join the sponsors of the resolution and would continue
its dialogue with Iran with a view to improving its
human rights situation.
42. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that his delegation had
abstained from voting on the draft resolution. It noted
with concern the situation of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, in particular the situation of
women, which was marked by gender disparity,
discriminatory laws and gender-based violence. The
need for protection of the rights of minorities, members
of the Baha’i International Community in particular,
and the importance of protecting civil and political
rights and human rights defenders was also of concern.
His delegation welcomed legal reforms undertaken by
Iran and its increased cooperation with the United
Nations, including its participation in the universal
periodic review, and expressed the hope that Iran
would ratify the international human rights treaties to
which it was not a party.
43. In the view of his delegation, the process that
produced country-specific resolutions must improve.
Those resolutions were the only ones that did involve
open and transparent consultations in the Committee.
The way some human rights situations were
highlighted and not others was perceived as reinforcing
a selective and politicized approach to human rights.
The Human Rights Council was the body best equipped
to examine human rights situations in a truly
multilateral and non-politicized manner.
44. Mr. Fiallo (Ecuador) said that his delegation
fully endorsed the work of the Human Rights Council
and rejected the politicization of human rights. The
Council must look at all countries without any
geographical distinction, double standards or political
motivations. Consequently, his delegation did not
support country-specific draft resolutions and had
abstained from voting.
45. Mr. Larijani (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
the high number of abstentions and votes against the
draft resolution demonstrated the lack of support
among a majority of member States and indicated that
measures were needed to prevent the abuse of the
United Nations human rights mechanisms. The
adoption of country-specific resolutions by the
Committee was damaging to the spirit of cooperation
and constituted abuse of the human rights system by
States that were themselves flagrant abusers of human
rights. The draft resolution specifically targeting his
country carried the hidden political agenda of certainA/C.3/65/SR.48
10-64244 8
countries and was completely out of touch with the
reality on the ground.
Agenda item 63: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.57: Report of the Human
Rights Council
46. Mr. Diallo (Mali), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of African States,
said that the report contained important
recommendations with respect to key human rights
issues. The Group hoped for the adoption of the
resolution by consensus and encouraged all member
States to become sponsors.
47. The Chair announced that India had become a
sponsor of the draft resolution.
48. Ms. Bouhamidi (Morocco), speaking on behalf
of States members of the Organisation of the Islamic
Conference (OIC), noted the valuable work of the
Human Rights Council and underlined the resolutions
pertaining to human rights in the occupied Palestinian
territory and the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination. It invited all member States to
support the draft resolution.
49. Mr. Apakan (Turkey) said that the Report of the
Human Rights Council and its addendum contained
many important resolutions and decisions, including
resolution 15/1 on the follow-up to the report of the
independent international fact-finding mission on the
incident of the humanitarian flotilla. While no separate
resolution had been initiated in the General Assembly
on the issue, his delegation would revisit its position
pending forthcoming developments and in consultation
with other interested parties. He invited all member
States to support the resolution.
50. Ms. Furman (Israel), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that the Council’s report
and resolutions demonstrated its bias and fixation with
Israel, reaffirmed its failure to adhere to its own
founding principles and called its integrity and
credibility into question. She noted that half of the
country-specific resolutions not dealing with technical
assistance were targeted at Israel. Her delegation
regretted having to call for a vote on the resolution and
urged other delegations with a genuine interest in
promoting a responsible human rights agenda around
the world to voice their concern as well.
51. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union in explanation of vote before the
voting, said that it was concerned with the procedural
aspects of the initiative. The compromise reached in
the General Committee of the General Assembly
allowed the Committee to consider and, if necessary,
take action on the recommendations of the Human
Rights Council to the General Assembly. The European
Union believed that member States should be able to
express their views on the individual recommendations
of the Human Rights Council. A generic resolution
taking note of the entire report brought no added value,
nor did it respect the compromise reached in the
General Committee. It was regrettable that it had not
been possible to discuss the procedural and other
implications of the text of the draft resolution with the
main sponsors in an open meeting.
52. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that Israel
refused to comply with any United Nations resolutions
and continued to impede the work of the United
Nations Fact Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict.
Moreover, Israeli perpetrators of crimes against
humanity continued to boast that they were immune
from prosecution. The United Nations must take all
necessary measures to investigate Israeli human rights
violations that had been documented in the report of
the Fact Finding Mission and must prosecute those
responsible. Victims of human rights violations
deserved justice. Syria would thus vote in favour of the
draft resolution.
53. Mr. Tagle (Chile) speaking in explanation of vote
before the voting, said that his delegation regretted that
the draft resolution could not be adopted by consensus.
It would vote in favour, without prejudice to its
position on any future Human Rights Council
resolutions.
54. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.57.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,A/C.3/65/SR.48
9 10-64244
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu.
55. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.57 was adopted by
119 votes to 2, with 55 abstentions.
56. Mr. Michelsen (Norway), speaking also on
behalf of Iceland, Liechtenstein, New Zealand and
Switzerland in explanation of vote, said that those
countries were strong supporters of the Human Rights
Council and its work. They viewed its standing nature
which allowed the Council to address emerging
situations quickly and the universal periodic review as
among its key achievements.
57. Those delegations had, however, abstained in the
vote for procedural reasons. In their view, the report of
the Human Rights Council should be discussed in the
plenary of the General Assembly rather than the Third
Committee; furthermore, the plenary should simply
take note of the report and its addendum. Member
States had taken varying positions on the
recommendations contained in the report, and the draft
resolution just adopted obscured those carefully
considered positions on specific recommendations.
Member States were entitled to express their views on
individual recommendations made by the Council.
58. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that his delegation had not taken part in
the voting because it could not accept the politically
motivated resolution of the Human Rights Council on
the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea contained in the report of
the Council.
59. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
the report of the Human Rights Council expressed both
its strengths and weaknesses. The United States had
supported many of its resolutions over the past year,
including several concerning human rights situations in
individual countries, in particular the extension of the
mandate of the Independent Expert on the situation of
human rights in the Sudan.
60. Acknowledgement of the report, however, should
not be taken as support for the Council’s unbalanced
and one-sided approach to the situation in Israel and
the occupied Palestinian territories. The Council should
treat all countries in an unbiased and objective manner.
The United States did not support resolutions that
singled out the Government of Israel and not the
violations of international law intentionally committed
by Hamas.
61. Allegations of violations of international law that
took place during the Gaza conflict warranted effective
domestic follow-up, and Israel had the mechanisms to
investigate, including a robust judiciary and the
capability for independent review of military
operations. The continuing bias against Israel was
further evident in the hastily adopted resolutionA/C.3/65/SR.48
10-64244 10
establishing a fact finding mission with a flawed
mandate to investigate the Gaza incident. His
delegation commended the panel established by the
Secretary-General to review the results of the internal
investigations in Israel and Turkey and the spirit of
cooperation it represented, and continued to regard that
panel as the primary method for the international
community to review that incident.
62. The work of his delegation on the Council would
continue to be guided by his Government’s
commitment to the universality of human rights,
dialogue, principled engagement and fidelity to the
truth.
63. Ms. Borland (Belize) said that her delegation had
wished to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
64. Ms. Murillo Ruin (Costa Rica) said that her
delegation had voted in favour of the draft resolution
because of its support for the work of the Human
Rights Council, but it agreed with other delegations
that the Third Committee did not have competence to
consider the report as a whole. The five-year review of
the status of the Council should clarify that matter for
the future.
65. As a draft resolution on the report of the Council
with nearly identical language had been adopted the
previous year without a vote, her delegation was
concerned that the vote just taken could send a
message that the work of the Council was being
questioned. Her country attached great importance to
the work of the Human Rights Council but did not
believe that the Third Committee was an appropriate
forum for discussion of its report.
66. Ms. Sunderland (Canada) said that her
delegation welcomed the many elements of the report
of the Human Rights Council which pointed to
progress. However, it had abstained in the voting based
on the belief that follow-up to the report should take
place in the plenary of the General Assembly and not
the Third Committee. The report also raised concerns
over the disproportionate focus in the Council on the
Middle East.
67. Mr. De Leon Huerta (Mexico) said that his
delegation regretted that it had to abstain in the vote on
a draft resolution concerning the Human Rights
Council, to which it attached great importance,
exclusively for procedural reasons. Consideration of
the report of the Council in the Third Committee was
inconsistent with the decision of the General
Committee to assign that report to the Plenary of the
General Assembly, which was the appropriate forum. A
final decision on that question should be taken as part
of the five-year review of the status of the Human
Rights Council.
Agenda item 66: Elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.53/Rev.1: International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination
68. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
referring to paragraphs 15, 16 and 20 of the draft
resolution, said that on its adoption, current provisions
in the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011
would provide for Committee members’ daily
subsistence allowances and conference servicing
requirements for the 20 additional meetings per year
that the Committee would hold during the biennium
2010-2011, in addition to provisions for travel and per
diem costs of the 18 members of the Committee to
attend its two annual regular sessions in Geneva of
15 working days each and conference services
requirements for the Committee meetings.
69. It was estimated that requirements of $2,149,200
relating to the 40 additional meetings of the Committee
would arise during the biennium 2012-2013. Those
funds would be considered within the context of the
preparation of the proposed programme budget for that
biennium and would provide for Committee members’
daily subsistence allowances, amounting to $259,600,
under Section 23, Human Rights, conference servicing
requirements, amounting to $15,200, under Section
28E, Administration, Geneva and conference servicing
requirements for the additional 40 meetings amounting
to $1,874,400 under Section 2, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council affairs and conference
management. The additional meetings would require
per session an estimated additional 200 pages of
pre-session documentation in four official languages of
the United Nations and 30 pages of post-session
documentation in all six official languages.
70. It was estimated that the preparation of the report
that was called for in paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution would amount to $24,000, to be met withinA/C.3/65/SR.48
11 10-64244
available resources of the programme budget for the
biennium 2010-2011.
71. Ms. Ponikvar (Slovenia) said that Argentina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica,
Cyprus, Ecuador, Estonia, France, Germany, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Lithuania, Madagascar, Malta,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Poland, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, Turkey and Ukraine
had also joined the sponsors.
72. Pursuant to further consultations, paragraph 15 of
the draft resolution had been amended to read “Decides
to extend the authorization to the Committee to meet
for an additional week per session, as a temporary
measure, in 2012 in order to address the backlog of
reports of State parties and additional complaints
awaiting consideration”.
73. Agreement had been reached to adopt the
amended resolution by consensus, reflecting agreement
among Member States on the crucial role of the
Convention and the Committee in the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance.
74. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that El Salvador, Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, Timor-Leste
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had joined
the sponsors of the draft resolution.
75. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.53/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
76. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
referring to preambular paragraph 8 and paragraphs 16
and 20 of the draft resolution, reiterated his country’s
position that that treaty body expenses should be
funded by States parties and not from the regular
budget of the United Nations. It was important to
support efforts to increase the efficiency of all treaty
bodies and improve working methods so that resources
were used as effectively as possible. Those efforts
played an important role in achieving a sustainable
solution in efforts to reduce backlogs.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.