United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.47
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
29 January 2013
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-61267 (E)
*1261267*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 47th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 28 November 2012, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions related to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly
on Ageing (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)A/C.3/67/SR.47
12-61267 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social Development and of the
twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.11/Rev.1)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued) (A/C.3/67/L.8/Rev.1 and L.12/Rev.1)
(c) Social development: Follow-up to the
International Year of Older Persons: Second
World Assembly on Ageing (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.13/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.11/Rev.1: Implementation
of the outcome of the World Summit for Social
Development and of the twenty-fourth special session
of the General Assembly
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Chir (Algeria), speaking on behalf of the
main sponsors and the Group of 77 and China, said that
Cyprus, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Portugal and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland had joined the sponsors.
New text in the draft resolution mentioned the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20) and the ministerial declaration adopted at the
high-level segment of the substantive session of 2012
of the Economic and Social Council.
3. He made a minor editorial change to preambular
paragraph 13 of the draft resolution.
4. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Republic of
Korea, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Serbia and South Sudan had joined the sponsors.
5. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.11/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
6. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that her
country was committed to accelerating progress toward
the Millennium Development Goals by investing in
national plans to boost agricultural development. The
United States supported the continued attention in the
text to the rights of indigenous peoples, but had voiced
concerns with regard to previous versions of the draft
resolution.
7. References to the global financial crisis were out
of date. External threats to agriculture, such as natural
disasters and trade distortion, were overemphasized,
while domestic food security issues and the importance
of creating a domestic enabling environment were not
sufficiently stressed. Domestic policies played a
critical role in providing opportunities and removing
obstacles to economic growth.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.8/Rev.1: Integrating
volunteering in the next decade
8. Mr. Hisajima (Japan) said that Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland had joined the sponsors.
9. Reading out oral amendments to the draft
resolution, he said that the new paragraph 6 should
read: “Recognizes that an approach to volunteering
may consider drawing on the notion of human security
in accordance with all the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 66/290, of 10 September 2012.”
In paragraph 9, “in particular” would be replaced by
“particularly” and the phrase “the elaboration of future
sustainable development goals” would be replaced by
“giving appropriate consideration to the issue in the
discussions of the post-2015 United Nations
development agenda;”.
10. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Colombia, Croatia, the
Dominican Republic, Egypt, Haiti, Lebanon,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Philippines, the Republic of Moldova,
San Marino, Serbia, South Sudan, Tunisia and Ukraine
had joined the sponsors.
11. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that her
country’s national literacy campaign in 1972 and its
hurricane response activities demonstrated its support
for volunteerism. Paragraph 6 of the draft resolution
should be without prejudice to the provision containedA/C.3/67/SR.47
3 12-61267
in General Assembly resolution 66/290 regarding
future discussions of human security. Cuba would be in
a better position to pursue such discussions following
the release of the report of the Secretary-General
requested in the draft resolution.
12. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that it was premature and
irresponsible to incorporate mention of human security
into any resolution. Forcing the issue weakened the
balance of understandings that had been reached. The
mention should not serve as a precedent. The concept
of human security should not be incorporated until
such time as it enjoyed consensus-based agreement.
13. Ms. Wilson (Jamaica) said that the discussions
ongoing in another forum on the United Nations
development agenda beyond 2015 should not be
prejudged.
14. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.8/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
15. Mr. Nebenzi (Russian Federation) said that a
number of provisions contained in the draft resolution
were of no practical significance for the work of
volunteers. The concept of human security was
unlikely to bring anything fundamentally new to
volunteer activity, and the attempt to introduce the
concept through the draft resolution was
counterproductive.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.12/Rev.1: Preparations for
and observance of the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family
16. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
17. Mr. Chir (Algeria), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said
that Turkey had joined the sponsors. The current draft
resolution emphasized poverty eradication, full
employment and decent work, work/life balance, social
integration and intergenerational solidarity.
18. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the
Russian Federation and Uzbekistan had joined the
sponsors.
19. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.12/Rev.1 was adopted.
20. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that family policies must
be inclusive in order to be successful. Family
structures had changed, and it was necessary to
continue recognizing that diversity, as had been done at
the United Nations conferences and summits in the
1990s and during the follow-up processes. Ongoing
policy discussion and development should continue to
reflect the diversity of family forms. All references to
the family in the draft resolution in question were
therefore understood as reflecting that diversity.
Support for an inclusive approach was increasing.
21. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that
different family structures shared the common trait of
providing a nurturing environment. The draft
resolution should have contained specific references to
various forms of the family.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.13/Rev.1: Follow-up to the
Second World Assembly on Ageing
22. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
23. Mr. Chir (Algeria), speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, said that Andorra, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Macedonia, Malta, Mexico, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Turkey and the United States of America had joined the
sponsors.
24. Mr. Tegos (Greece), speaking on a point of order,
recalled that Security Council resolution 817 (1993)
recommended the provisional use of the term “the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia” to refer to
the State in question pending settlement of the
difference that had arisen over the name of the State.
All States were therefore requested to use the proper
name of that country.
25. Mr. Chir (Algeria) said that the current draft
resolution recommended that the situation of older
persons be taken into account in ongoing efforts to
achieve internationally agreed development goals.
26. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Hungary, Iceland,
Israel, Kyrgyzstan, Monaco, Montenegro, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Ukraine and the UnitedA/C.3/67/SR.47
12-61267 4
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland had
joined the sponsors.
27. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.13/Rev.1 was adopted.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/67/L.71)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.71: Follow-up to the
Fourth World Conference on Women and full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly
28. Ms. Šćepanović (Vice-Chair) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of the Chair of the Committee.
29. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
30. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.71 was adopted.
31. Mr. Chir (Algeria), speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, said that obstacles to the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-
third special session of the General Assembly
remained. Responsibility for implementation lay
primarily at the national level.
32. The Chair, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 55/488, suggested that the Committee should
take note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on its
forty-ninth, fiftieth and fifty-first sessions (A/67/38)
and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of the Special Rapporteur on Violence against
Women (A/67/227).
33. It was so decided.
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.61)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.61: Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa
34. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
35. Ms. Farngalo (Liberia), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the African Group, said that by
late 2011, Africa had become host to approximately
one quarter of the world’s refugees, many of whom
were women and children. The draft resolution
highlighted the burden and experience of the African
States in hosting refugees and addressing issues related
to returnees and displaced persons.
36. Australia, Chile, Croatia, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, Ireland and Italy had joined the
sponsors.
37. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Montenegro, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia,
Slovenia, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland had joined the sponsors.
38. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.61 was adopted.
39. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that a more transparent
and inclusive consultation process would have
provided the opportunity to strengthen the resolution
and garner the sponsorship of more member States of
the European Union.
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.23/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.23/Rev.1: Rights of the
child
40. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the Rules
of Procedure of the General Assembly, made reference
to the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children, which
would be funded from the regular budget starting from
the biennium 2014-2015. In that connection, he drew
the attention of the Third Committee to the provisions
of section IV of General Assembly resolution 45/248 B
and subsequent resolutions, the most recent of which
was resolution 66/246, in which the General Assembly
reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee was the
appropriate Main Committee of the Assembly entrusted
with the responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters, and reaffirmed the role of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.A/C.3/67/SR.47
5 12-61267
41. During the biennium 2012-2013, the core
activities and mandate of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the current biennium would
continue to be funded through voluntary contributions.
The Secretary-General would have to undertake a
comprehensive assessment of the scope and details of
regular budget resources needed for the effective
performance of the mandate and the sustainability of
the core activities of the Special Representative as
requested in the draft resolution. The estimated
resource requirements would be included in the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014-
2015 and would be reviewed in accordance with
established procedures.
42. Adoption of the draft resolution would therefore
entail no additional requirements under the programme
budget for the biennium 2012-2013.
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to
self-determination (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.58)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.58: Use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
43. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
44. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that Belarus,
the Congo, Ghana, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, the Sudan, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam and Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors. The
current draft resolution expressed grave concern with
regard to human rights violations involving
mercenaries and employees of private military and
security companies, including summary executions,
forced disappearances, torture and rape.
45. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Dominican Republic, the Gambia, Mauritania,
Somalia and Uganda had joined the sponsors.
46. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus) speaking on behalf
of the European Union in explanation of vote before
the voting, said that the Third Committee and the
Human Rights Council were not the proper forums for
addressing mercenary activity. Such matters should not
be approached primarily from the standpoint of human
rights and the threat to the right of self-determination.
47. Private military and security companies should
not be included in the draft resolution. Such entities
must be properly regulated and held accountable for
breaches of international law. It would be false and
misleading to equate mercenaries and employees of
private military and security companies. Regulation of
private military and security companies was related to
several branches of international law, including law on
the use of force, international humanitarian law, human
rights law, States’ responsibility and international
criminal law. In the absence of an understanding on
important definitions and approaches, the member
States of the European Union would vote against the
draft resolution.
48. At the request of the representative of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.58.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.A/C.3/67/SR.47
12-61267 6
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Colombia, Fiji, Mexico, Switzerland.
49. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.58 was adopted by
122 votes to 52, with 5 abstentions.
50. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that his
Government supported the right of colonized peoples
to self-determination in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which stated that that
right existed only where there was an active subject in
the form of a people living under alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation. All General Assembly
resolutions since resolution 2065 (XX) and the annual
resolutions of the Special Committee on decolonization
on the question of the Malvinas Islands recognized the
existence of a sovereignty dispute between Argentina
and the United Kingdom, which should be resolved
through bilateral negotiations. The United Kingdom
had illegitimately occupied the Malvinas Islands, South
Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas, had expelled the Argentine
population and had replaced it with United Kingdom
subjects. Hence it was not the right to self-
determination which applied to the situation but the
principle of territorial integrity.
51. Ms. Walker (United Kingdom) said that her
Government had no doubts about its sovereignty over
the Falkland Islands and the surrounding maritime
areas, and attached great importance to the principle of
self-determination as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, which underpinned its position on
the Islands. Sovereignty negotiations would not be
possible without the islanders’ agreement. Their
democratically elected representatives had clearly
expressed their views at the 2012 session of the Special
Committee on decolonization, at which they had
requested recognition of their right to self-
determination, reiterating the historical fact that the
islands had had no indigenous inhabitants and that no
civilian population had been removed before the arrival
of the islanders, who were the only people of the
Falkland Islands and wanted no change in the Islands’
status.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.27/Rev.1,
A/C.3/67/L.32/Rev.1*, A/C.3/67/L.33 and
A/C.3/67/L.39)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.27/Rev.1: United Nations
Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for
South-West Asia and the Arab Region
52. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, said that, with
regard to the request in paragraph 5 of the draft
resolution for the Secretary-General to provide regular
budget resources to the United Nations Human Rights
Training and Documentation Centre for South-West
Asia and the Arab Region from 2014-2015, the
attention of the Committee was drawn to section 4 of
General Assembly resolution 45/248b and subsequent
resolutions, in which the General Assembly had
reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee was responsible
for administrative and budgetary matters, and had
confirmed the role of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
53. The Centre’s activities in 2012-2013 would be
funded through voluntary contributions. Meanwhile,
the Secretary-General would assess the regular budget
resources needed for the performance of the Centre’s
mandate, as requested in the draft resolution. The
estimated requirements would be included in the
proposed programme budget for 2014-2015 and would
be reviewed by the intergovernmental bodies.A/C.3/67/SR.47
7 12-61267
54. The request in paragraph 6 was expected to
require the production by the Department of General
Assembly and Conference Management of one 8,500-
word document in the official languages, for which
provision had not been made in the programme budget
for 2012-2013. If the General Assembly adopted the
draft resolution, therefore, additional requirements of
$50,900 would arise under section 2, but every effort
would be made to absorb those requirements within
existing resources and to report thereon in the second
performance report for 2012-2013.
55. Mr. Laram (Qatar) said that Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Egypt, Grenada, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Mauritania,
Morocco, Oman, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, Tunisia, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates and Yemen had become sponsors of the
draft resolution. Following consultations with the
Member States, his delegation had reflected in the text
requests for regular budget funding for the Centre to
start in 2014-2015. The adoption of the draft resolution
would be a landmark in the Centre’s ability to fulfil its
mandate; political changes in the region had confirmed
the need for a specialized body meeting the need for
human rights capacity-building. He hoped that the draft
resolution would be adopted by consensus.
56. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Cameroon, the Comoros, the Philippines and
Somalia had joined the sponsors.
57. The Chair said that a recorded vote had been
requested on the draft resolution.
58. Mr. Laram (Qatar) asked which delegation had
requested the recorded vote.
59. The Chair said that the vote had been requested
by the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic.
60. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that her
delegation was surprised that the Qatari Government
was seeking to finance the Centre from the regular
budget despite the financial crisis at the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). Regular budget funding would run counter
to General Assembly resolution 60/153 on the
establishment of the Centre, which stipulated that it
should be funded through voluntary contributions.
61. Her Government had monitored the Centre’s
activities since its creation and did not believe that they
justified regular budget funding. The Centre was not
functioning as a regional centre, but had instead been
used by the Qatari Government to support non-
governmental organizations and opposition groups in
the region.
62. The Qatari delegation had violated Third
Committee and General Assembly procedure, since it
should have submitted the draft resolution to the Fifth
Committee. Her delegation advised the Qatari
Government to reduce its funding of terrorist groups in
the Syrian Arab Republic so that it could finance the
Centre without resorting to the regular budget. Her
delegation would therefore vote against the draft
resolution.
63. Ms. Robl (United States of America), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that
institutions such as the Centre were important to
countries in political transition and thanked Qatar for
its commitment to human rights capacity-building. Her
delegation supported the Centre’s work but was
disappointed that the draft resolution could not be
adopted by consensus. It would vote in favour of the
draft resolution.
64. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.27/Rev.1.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,A/C.3/67/SR.47
12-61267 8
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
Syrian Arab Republic.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Indonesia,
Japan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Samoa, Sri
Lanka, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe.
65. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.27/Rev.1 was adopted
by 149 votes to 1, with 17 abstentions.1
66. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union and its member States, said that
the European Union agreed that regional cooperation
was fundamental to the promotion of human rights and
therefore welcomed the start of training and regional
consultation at the Centre. It noted the assessment of
the High Commissioner on Human Rights that recent
developments in the Middle East and North Africa had
generated both growing demand for the Centre’s
activities and concerns about the Centre’s capacity to
meet that demand.
67. With regard to United Nations resources, the
European Union’s aim was to maintain the stability of
the regular budget, promote best practices and reduce
spending. It welcomed the clarification of the analysis
required before regular budget funding could start, and
__________________
1 The delegation of Indonesia subsequently informed the
Committee that it had intended to vote in favour of the
draft resolution.
would appreciate further assessment of the Centre’s
work. Alternative means of funding, such as cost-
sharing and voluntary contributions, should be
considered. His delegation asked for those factors to be
included in the considerations outlined by the
Secretariat for the biennium 2014-2015. The European
Union was committed to human rights and would
continue to examine how the Centre’s mandate could
be strengthened. The European Union and its member
States had therefore voted in favour of the draft
resolution.
68. Mr. Hisajima (Japan) said that his delegation had
abstained from voting on the draft resolution. Although
it recognized the importance of the Centre, it was
cautious about approving regular budget expenditure in
the current climate, favouring voluntary contributions
instead.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.32/Rev.1*: Human rights
and extreme poverty
69. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
70. Mr. Thornberry (Peru) said that the draft
resolution had been updated to include a reference to
the guiding principles on extreme poverty and human
rights adopted by the Human Rights Council in its
resolution 21/11. His delegation was convinced of the
close relationship between the fight against extreme
poverty and the exercise of human rights, and hoped
that the draft resolution would allow people in extreme
poverty to enjoy those rights.
71. Bulgaria, China, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Germany, Greece, Japan, Latvia, Malta,
Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Spain and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland had
become sponsors of the draft resolution. He hoped that
the draft resolution would be adopted by consensus.
72. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Burundi, Cameroon, the Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Estonia, the Gambia, Georgia,
Ghana, Grenada, Honduras, Liberia, Malaysia,
Norway, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
South Africa, Suriname, Tunisia and Ukraine had
joined the sponsors.
73. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.32/Rev.1* was adopted.A/C.3/67/SR.47
9 12-61267
74. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that
although the Guiding Principles on Extreme Poverty
and Human Rights were useful to States in the
formulation of poverty eradication programmes, her
delegation disagreed with certain interpretations of
human rights law contained in those Principles. It had
therefore joined the consensus on the draft resolution
on the understanding that it did not imply that States
should implement obligations under instruments to
which they were not parties. Her delegation recognized
no change in existing law as a result of its approval of
the draft resolution, and understood the reaffirmation
of various instruments to apply only to States which
had already adhered to them. It also felt that the
references to a global food crisis were inaccurate.
Although the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) had issued warnings about
regional crises and price volatility, it had emphasized
that the situation did not equate to a global food crisis.
75. Mr. Ruidiaz (Chile) said that the draft resolution
had taken note with appreciation of the Guiding
Principles as useful to States in formulating poverty
eradication policies. Following the financial crisis,
States should not adopt measures which infringed the
rights of those living in extreme poverty. The Guiding
Principles should be considered as global political
guidelines which applied States’ human rights
obligations to the specific situation of people in
extreme poverty. His delegation encouraged the
application of those guidelines by the United Nations,
intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.33: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
76. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
77. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that Angola, the Congo,
India, Mauritania, Saint Lucia, Togo, Rwanda and
Zambia had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
The large number of sponsors proved that the
international community was aware of the great
challenges and opportunities of globalization. Its
balance, however, did not favour developing countries
and made it harder for them to protect human rights.
Although the aim of the draft resolution was to address
the situation, certain delegations had refused to discuss
fundamental problems in the text with the sponsors.
They looked forward to more engagement during
future consultations that would allow future related
draft resolutions to be adopted by consensus.
78. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Dominican Republic, the Gambia and the
Philippines had joined the sponsors.
79. Mr. Constantinou (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union and its member States in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
European Union acknowledged that globalization could
affect the full enjoyment of some human rights but that
its impact should be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
The draft resolution, however, generalized the problem
by claiming that globalization had an impact on all
human rights.
80. The European Union also felt that the draft
resolution focused almost exclusively on the negative
aspects of globalization and ignored the positive ones.
Globalization could offer means of addressing acute
problems such as extreme poverty. European Union
member States would therefore vote against the draft
resolution.
81. At the request of the representative of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.33.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, RussianA/C.3/67/SR.47
12-61267 10
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
None.
82. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.33 was adopted by
128 votes to 53.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.39: The right to development
83. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
84. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, said that China had
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
85. She read out a number of oral amendments to the
text. The seventeenth preambular paragraph should be
deleted. Paragraphs 2 and 5 should be deleted and
replaced by a new paragraph 2 reading “Endorses the
conclusions and recommendations adopted by
consensus by the Working Group on the Right to
Development of the Human Rights Council at its
eleventh session, and, while reaffirming them, calls for
their immediate, full and effective implementation by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and other relevant actors, noting also
the efforts under way within the framework of the
Working Group with a view to complementing the
tasks entrusted to it by the Human Rights Council in its
resolution 4/4”. At the end of paragraph 3, the words
“with the recognition that the Working Group will
convene annual sessions of five working days and
submit its report to the Council” should be added, thus
restoring the wording agreed by the Committee in
2011. The first line of paragraph 8 should be replaced
with the words “Encourage Member States and
relevant stakeholders when submitting views on the
work of the high-level task force”.
86. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that El Salvador and Senegal had also joined the
sponsors.
87. Mr. Ansari Dogaheh (Islamic Republic of Iran),
speaking on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, said
that the right to development and self-determination,
respect for sovereignty, non-interference in internal
affairs and the prevention of violence were essential to
peace and friendly relations, as set out in the Charter of
the United Nations. His delegation believed in a
constructive approach to the promotion of human
rights and the equal treatment of civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights, including the right
to development.
88. The Heads of State and Government of the
Non-Aligned Movement had reaffirmed at their 2012
summit the need to promote human rights through
international dialogue and to ensure the realization of
the right to development. They had also reaffirmed the
objective of making that right a reality as set out in the
Millennium Declaration, and had decided to consider
the negative impact of coercive measures which
affected that right.
89. A new human order was needed to reverse the
growing disparities between rich and poor through
poverty eradication, full employment, decent work and
social integration. Developing economies had been
severely affected by the financial crisis, which had had
a negative impact on the right to development. The
crisis should therefore be addressed in order to
promote development through sustained economic
growth, poverty eradication and sustainableA/C.3/67/SR.47
11 12-61267
development. States should foster efforts to fight
extreme poverty and hunger in line with Millennium
Development Goal 1 and participation by the poorest in
decision-making. The United Nations should ensure
that the right to development was upheld, including
through the elaboration of a convention.
90. His delegation called on the United Nations to
mainstream the right to development in its activities
and in the strategies of international financial trading
systems, taking into account that the economic
principles of equity, non-discrimination, transparency,
accountability, participation and international
cooperation were indispensable to the right to
development and the prevention of discriminatory
treatment of matters of concern to developing
countries.
91. The draft resolution was an attempt to meet the
development aspirations of the Non-Aligned
Movement. Since the Movement had shown flexibility
in accommodating different views, it looked forward to
more cooperation with interested partners. It regretted
the fact that certain delegations had called for a vote
and hoped that the Member States would in future be
more flexible in order to achieve consensus.
92. Ms. Robl (United States of America), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that her
Government was the biggest bilateral donor of
overseas assistance and recognized that development
depended on political leaders and institutions in
developing countries. Progress was possible where
political leaders governed responsibly, but was difficult
otherwise, regardless of the international community’s
engagement. Development goals would be achieved
through the promotion of the rights set out in the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights; economic
goals should be pursued taking account of development
and environmental needs.
93. Her delegation would vote against the draft
resolution because it did not represent consensus on the
best way to achieve development goals. Resolutions on
the right to development should not include unrelated
material on controversial topics being addressed
elsewhere. Her delegation was not in favour of a
binding international agreement on the matter and
therefore could not support the current wording.
Discussion of the right to development should focus on
universal rights which individuals could demand from
Governments; that concern was not reflected in the
draft resolution.
94. As her delegation had stated in the discussions of
the Working Group on the Right to Development and
the Human Rights Council, the indicators produced by
the high-level task force on the implementation of the
right to development should be taken into account
before changes to the work of the task force were
considered. Her delegation would, however, continue
to engage with the Working Group in order to move
forward.
95. At the request of the representative of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/67/L.39.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, France,
Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,A/C.3/67/SR.47
12-61267 12
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Canada, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Japan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Ukraine.
96. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.39 was adopted by
147 votes to 4, with 28 abstentions.
97. Ms. Lau (Canada) said that her Government
supported the Declaration on the Right to Development
but was concerned by the notion of a legally binding
instrument and felt that the international community
should focus on helping individuals fulfil their
development potential. Her delegation had therefore
voted against the draft resolution.
98. Ms. Walker (United Kingdom) said that her
Government was committed to the right to
development and was a major donor of development
assistance. The delegation of Cuba had made various
improvements to the text but her delegation’s major
substantive concern had not been addressed. A lack of
development in a particular country was not a pretext
for curtailing human rights. Although individual States
were responsible for protecting their citizens, no such
obligation existed between States. Her Government
would continue to engage with the Working Group on
the Right to Development, although in its view the
Working Group’s efforts should not lead to a binding
international legal standard. The right to development
should evolve consensually, without politicization, and
on the basis of respect for civil, political, economic and
cultural rights. Her delegation had therefore voted
against the draft resolution.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.