United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.10
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
30 November 2010
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-57596 (E)
*1057596*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 10th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on on Tuesday, 12 October 2010, at 10 a.m.
Chairperson: Mrs. Ploder (Vice-Chairperson) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Austria)
Later: Mr. Monthe. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 27: Social Development (continued)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly
on Ageing (continued)
(d) United Nations Literacy Decade: education for all (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(b) Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women
and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly (continued)2
A/C.3/65/SR.10
The meeting was called to order at 10.08 a.m.
Agenda item 27: Social Development (continued)
(A/C.3/65/L.8, L.9, L.10, L.11 and L.12)
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social Development and of the
twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly (continued) (A/C.3/65/L.11)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued) (A/C.3/65/L.10 and L.12)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older
Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing
(continued) (A/C.3/65/L.8)
(d) United Nations Literacy Decade: education for
all (continued) (A/C.3/65/L.9)
Draft resolution A/C/3/65/L.11: Implementation of the
outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly
1. Mr. Al-Shami (Yemen) presented draft resolution
A./C.3/65/L.11 on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
Draft resolution A./C.3/65/L.10. Co-operatives in
social development
2. Mrs. Sodov (Mongolia) presented draft
resolution A./C.3/65/L.10 on behalf of its sponsors.
She noted that co-operatives offered a particularly
useful business model in cases of economic difficulty
and market dysfunction. In preparation for the
International Year of Co-operatives, the purpose of
which was to create an environment conducive to co-
operatives, to promote the formation and growth of co-
operatives, and to raise awareness of their contribution
to economic and social development, 16 countries had
already appointed co-ordinators, and the United
Nations system was working in partnership with the
media, the academic world and the International
Co-operative Alliance to ensure the success of that
event. Adoption of the draft resolution would allow
planned activities to get underway and would give
greater impact to the International Year.
Draft resolution A./C.3/65/L.12. Realizing the
Millennium Development Goals for persons with
disabilities towards 2015 and beyond.
3. Mrs. Hernando (Philippines) presented draft
resolution A./C.3/65/L.12 on behalf of its sponsors.
Recalling that the draft contained a request to the
Secretary-General to organize a high-level meeting on
strengthening efforts to ensure the inclusion of persons
with disabilities in all aspects of development
activities, she said that the sponsors were ready to
engage in unofficial consultations with delegations that
doubted the relevance of the initiative.
4. The Chairperson announced that Chile was
cosponsoring the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A./C.3/65/L.8. Follow-Up to the
Second World Assembly on Ageing
5. Mr. Al-Shami (Yemen) presented draft resolution
A./C.3/65/L.8 on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
Draft resolution A./C.3/65/L.9. United Nations Literacy
Decade: education for all
6. Mrs. Sodov (Mongolia) presented draft
resolution A./C.3/65/L.9, for which Bangladesh and
Chile were the cosponsors. She noted that the text
sought to draw attention to the fact that much remained
to be done in light of the target dates set for achieving
the objectives of the United Nations Literacy Decade
and the second of the Millennium Development
Goals – guaranteeing primary education for all – and
that a renewed political commitment and greater
investments were required on the part of member
States.
7. The Chairperson announced that Cameroon was
cosponsoring the draft resolution.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(A/65/336)
(a) Advancement of women (continued) (A/65/38,
A/65/208, A/65/209, A/65/268, A/65/218,
A/65/334 and A/65/354-S/2010/466)
(b) Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth
World Conference on Women and of the
twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly (continued) (A/65/204 and
A/C.3/65/L.7)
8. Mrs. Hoang Thi Thanh Nga (Vietnam) hailed
the creation of UN Women and the appointment of
Mrs. Michelle Bachelet as its head. She also welcomed3
A/C.3/65/SR.10
the steps taken by States to improve their legislation
for protecting women against violence and
discrimination, to adopt national action plans focused
on women's empowerment and their participation in
decision-making, and to strengthen prevention and
awareness raising efforts. Despite the progress made,
there were a number of questions that deserved
attention.
9. First, it was important to achieve a smooth
transition to the new entity and to ensure close and
comprehensive co-ordination between UN Women and
other development assistance agencies. In conflict or
post-conflict situations, there would have to be greater
co-ordination between UN Women and peacekeeping
missions in order to assert the role of women in all
strategies and at all stages of the peace process.
10. Second, the UN and member States would have
to strive to institute laws and policies to promote
women's active participation in economic activities and
decision-making. Such participation would be
facilitated if women had readier access to education
and training.
11. Third, women must be seen as agents of change
and not merely as victims. Vietnam had experienced a
post-conflict situation and was convinced that women
could play an active role in building peace and
reconstructing their country, provided measures were
taken to encourage them to do so, and that their needs
in such areas as health and education were taken into
account.
12. Vietnam had always made women's participation
a priority of its development policies. Aware of the
importance of education for women's empowerment,
the Vietnamese government had drawn up a national
action plan for the advancement of women and a
national action plan on education for all, and women
now represented nearly half of enrolment across all
levels of education.
13. Much remained to be done to improve gender
equality in rural areas and in the labour market, and to
ensure equality of opportunities, salaries and access to
decision-making positions. Vietnam was ready to co-
operate with all its partners, and in particular within
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, to achieve
that common objective.
14. Mrs. Abdolmaleki (Islamic Republic of Iran)
declared that the Islamic Republic of Iran had an
environment that was favourable to the advancement of
women, one that drew its inspiration from religious
teachings, the principle of moderation, and the precept
of strengthening the family.
15. The most recent statistics showed that female
employment had risen by 14.53%, that the literacy rate
had reached 80.34%, and that in higher education 68%
of students and 30% of the faculty were women. In the
health sector, women represented 40% of specialized
physicians and 98% of gynaecologists. In the context
of the national system for treating HIV, the country
now had 150 HIV screening centres. In the political
sphere, the number of women on municipal and village
councils had increased by 80%, and 2,334 women were
currently playing an active role in the village decision-
making process.
16. At the same time, the Islamic Republic of Iran
had prepared a charter of women's rights and duties,
based on three pillars – spirituality, justice and
security – within the framework of religion and
national principles. Legislation also reflected the many
areas of progress with respect to women's rights and
family matters, for example the right to child custody,
the right to file for divorce, and equality in obtaining
“blood money” from insurance companies.
17. In keeping with Islamic values and precepts, it
was important to adopt a fair position on the rights and
freedoms of women and to take into account their
particular biological and emotional characteristics. In
fact, equality failed to recognize the natural differences
between men and women. The basic and most
important unit in Iranian society was the family, and in
its development programmes the Islamic Republic of
Iran was seeking to strengthen that unit by promoting
women's empowerment within the family.
18. Finally, the Islamic Republic of Iran saw the
recent economic crisis as the direct result of worldwide
political injustice and to remedy that situation it was
calling for a change of economic system, justice for all,
and morality instead of mere profit-seeking.
19. Mrs. Sapag (Chile) welcomed creation of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women. She was also pleased with
the progress that States had made in implementing the
recommendations from the in-depth study on all forms
of violence against women, dealing with the promotion
of gender equality, the protection of women's rights,
and the elimination of physical and psychological4
A/C.3/65/SR.10
violence against women. Mrs. Sapag hoped that States
would report on their actions in this regard, as a way of
helping to disseminate best practices.
20. Chile was concerned by the problem of violence
against women and children, particularly sexual
violence, in conflict situations, and it recognized
women's role as agents of peace and of change. In a
move to implement Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace and security, Chile had
instituted a national action plan to protect women in
cases of conflict and to involve them in the peace
process.
21. Chile was pleased to note that 28 countries had
taken steps within their national health policies to end
obstetric fistula, which continued to pose a danger for
millions of women, and it underlined the need to train
and maintain health personnel, especially in the
primary health field.
22. Chile had taken measures to promote the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
23. For the period 2010-2014, the new government
would be working through the National Women's
Service to promote the economic emancipation of
women by facilitating their access to the labour market,
increasing their employment possibilities, giving both
women and men the possibility of reconciling working
and family life, and strengthening the role of the family
as the foundation of society. As part of the emergency
reconstruction programme, it had already launched a
campaign to involve women in rebuilding the country,
which was ravaged by the earthquake of February 2010,
and it had created an advisory commission on women,
work and motherhood, comprising experts of both sexes
in the areas of work, family, motherhood and the
economy, as well as representatives of labour and
management.
24. Mrs. Carol Fulp (United States of America) said
that the creation of UN Women represented more than
a simple reform of the United Nations system, and she
welcomed the appointment of its head, Michelle
Bachelet, who had the leadership experience needed
for that job. For 2010 the United States had contributed
$5.985 billion to the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM), currently folded into UN
Women. The United States would seek to ensure that
UN Women had sufficient resources to carry out its
mission and would participate actively in the work of
its Executive Board.
25. The United States envisioned that UN Women
would have a comprehensive mandate to mainstream
gender equality throughout the UN system. Aware that
the empowerment of women and girls and the full
achievement of their potential, especially in health and
education, would serve to improve living conditions
and institute an environment of peace and prosperity,
the United States government hoped that UN Women
would inform policies and implement programmes to
ensure women's full and equal participation in political,
economic and social life, including in conflict
prevention and peace building, and to combat violence
against women.
26. UN Women would be conducting the bulk of its
work in the field, and it would need to have the
required number of staff to work with other UN
agencies and government ministries to align
programmes with women's strengths and needs in order
to effect real change in their lives.
27. Although UN Women had a key role to play in
addressing women's empowerment, its creation did not
relieve other UN organizations of their responsibility to
consider how their work impacted women. Rather, UN
Women should serve as a catalyst to ensure that all
parts of the UN system were mainstreaming gender
considerations throughout their activities.
28. Mrs. Azusa Shinohara (Japan) was pleased that
the 54th session of the Committee on the Status of
Women had commemorated the 15th anniversary of the
Fourth World Conference on Women. She also
welcomed the creation of UN Women, recognizing the
need to mainstream the issue of gender equality in all
areas of the United Nations' work, and she declared
that her country would contribute actively to the
activities of the new entity.
29. At the high-level General Assembly meeting held
in September 2010 on the Millennium Development
Goals, Japan had announced the adoption of new health
and education policies, with a particular focus on
maternal, newborn and child health. The Japanese
government was committed to provide $5 billion over
five years beginning 2011 for financing these policies.
With its partners in the international community, Japan
had set the objective of saving the lives of 680,000
mothers by ensuring a continuum of health services,5
A/C.3/65/SR.10
including prenatal and antenatal care. In this way Japan
would be contributing to achievement of millennium
development goal (MDG) 5 (improving maternal
health) and also MDG 3 (promoting gender equality
and women's empowerment), which was related to the
achievement of all the other MDGs.
30. In the run-up to commemoration of the 10th
anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
on women, peace and security, Japan hoped that a
comprehensive set of indicators to track
implementation of the resolution would be adopted and
implemented shortly. As part of its development
assistance in post-conflict countries, Japan was giving
priority to strengthening women's participation in
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and peace
building. Through the United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security, Japan was financing a project in Sri
Lanka that included vocational training for widows so
that they could take an active role in post-conflict
society. In 2010, as chair of Asia-Pacific Economic
Co-operation (APEC), Japan had hosted three meetings
on the subject of gender equality, to promote
networking among women leaders and encourage the
economic empowerment of women.
31. On the domestic front, Japan had been vigorously
engaged in efforts to create a gender-equal society and
to promote women's empowerment. In December 2009
it had launched a new action plan of measures to
combat trafficking in persons. In 2010, the Japanese
government would finalize the "third basic plan for
gender equality", which would include expanding
women's participation in decision-making processes
and taking steps to resolve their employment problems.
Japan would also be addressing the concluding
observations of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women on Japan's sixth
periodic report.
32. Mrs. Al-Thani (Qatar) said her country was
applying the Beijing Platform for action in a manner
consistent with Sharia and its social values. Qatar was
convinced of the importance of strengthening women's
rights in the context of consolidating the rights and
duties of the family, the pillar of society. Her country
had opened the way to progress in the field of gender
equality and women's empowerment, and was applying
a comprehensive strategy to promote women and all
members of the family.
33. The Supreme Council on Family Affairs was
responsible for women's empowerment. On the
legislative front, the right of women to vote and to
stand for election encouraged their participation in
decision-making. Laws relating to women and the
family were regularly reviewed to take into account the
international commitments of Qatar, which was a party
to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. Measures taken to
improve women's access to employment were
producing a steady increase in the proportion of
women in the workforce, in both the public and private
sectors, providing opportunities for part-time work and
teleworking, and offering training and assistance to
small businesses
34. Specialized independent institutions had been
established to combat violence against women, and
24-hour hotlines are available for families and
children. Aware of the importance of education, Qatar
had undertaken to improve the quality of public
education. Qatar saw in the continuation of conflict in
various parts of the world a major obstacle to ending
the violence and the physical abuse that women were
suffering, particularly those living under foreign
occupation. Finally, Qatar welcomed the creation of
UN Women
35. Mrs. Abubakar (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
welcomed the creation of UN Women. The country
attached great importance to the provision of health
care for women during and after pregnancy. Thus, 98%
of Libyan women had access to prenatal healthcare
facilities, and as a result the maternal and infant
mortality rates had dropped from 77 per 100,000 live
births in 1992 to 27 in 2007. In 2005, the life
expectancy of Libyan women was 75 years.
36. Aware of the importance of women's rights, as
enshrined in Sharia law, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
had promulgated various laws to achieve gender
equality and to end sexist discrimination. Libyan law
guaranteed women equal rights in all fields, including
social security, retirement, property ownership and
social activities, and it granted them 14 weeks of paid
maternity leave. The Citizenship Law (Law 24 of
2010) allowed the children of a Libyan woman married
to a foreigner to obtain Libyan citizenship. Under Law
10 of 1984 on marriage and divorce, men who wanted
to take a second wife must obtain the written consent
of their spouse. Law 12 of 2010 on the advancement of
women guaranteed provision of day-care services.6
A/C.3/65/SR.10
37. The Libyan delegation was particularly
concerned at the deteriorating humanitarian situation of
Palestinian women, whose rights were being gravely
violated by the Israeli occupying power, and it was also
alarmed at the persecutions that the Palestinian people
in general were suffering, in flagrant disregard of
international human rights instruments. The continued
occupation, the siege of Gaza, and the construction of
settlements were examples of these violations.
38. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya was also very
concerned at the deteriorating situation of women in
Africa, due to the spread of disease, hunger and
poverty. It urged the international community to pay
more attention to the situation of these women and to
help them overcome the crisis that was preventing
them from achieving their potential in the areas of
education, health and development, under conditions of
safety and security. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya was
calling for an end to violence against women in all its
forms, especially during armed conflicts. In particular,
it condemned the traffic in human beings and violence
against female migrants, and it had joined the Group of
Friends United against Human Trafficking.
39. Mrs. Cho Hyung-hwa (Republic of Korea) said
that significant progress had been made during the year
in promoting women's rights, with the boosting of
United Nations resources and the redoubling of efforts
to improve maternal health. The Republic of Korea
welcomed the creation of UN Women and hoped that
this new entity would make the UN system more
accountable and effective in responding to gender
issues. Her country also approved the creation by the
Human Rights Council of a working group to examine
the question of discrimination against women in
legislation.
40. Regretting the slow progress towards the
millennium goal relating to maternal health, which
could be blamed primarily on insufficient investment,
Mrs. Cho said that health was not only a fundamental
right but also an indispensable element for empowering
women. The Republic of Korea welcomed the
Secretary-General's launch of the Global Strategy for
Women's and Children's Health. For its part, it would
increase spending on maternal, newborn and child
health.
41. Efforts to improve the status of women continued
to face obstacles, however, including the fact that the
majority of children not in school were girls and the
fact that women represented the majority of poor
people in the world, with increasing numbers of them
living below the poverty threshold.
42. Since the 1960s, the Government of the Republic
of Korea had been striving to reinforce women's
political and economic capacities, and had been taking
account of their needs and interests in the planning of
national policies. Women's empowerment had been
mainstreamed at all stages of the national development
plan's implementation, particularly in the fields of
education, employment, culture, international
co-operation and social life. Political parties were
required to ensure that women accounted for at least
50% of candidates presented for general elections.
43. In the current situation, the international
community must give thought to the status of disabled
women, women refugees, and women living below the
poverty threshold, as well as to the problem of violence
against women. It was to be hoped that these problems
would be effectively addressed in the context of global
collaboration for making gender equality a reality.
44. Speaking on behalf of a youth delegation from
the Republic of Korea, Ms. Kim Jiyeon said that her
country's government had adopted various measures,
including laws for promoting gender equality. She
stressed the importance of education in achieving the
principle of gender equality throughout life. To be
effectively assimilated at an early age, that principle
must be enshrined in school programmes and
publicized in the media, particularly via the Internet
and online social networks. Sexist stereotypes
continued to hinder adolescents in achieving their
potential, and boys and girls alike must be encouraged
to follow courses of study traditionally reserved to one
sex or the other. Educating young people in such
questions as pregnancy and childbirth could help
protect women and their families. There was also a
need to correct the disinformation that many teenagers
were receiving, especially over the Internet. Teenagers
who had adopted the principle of gender equality could
play a key role in society.
45. Mr. Butt (Pakistan), quoting from one of the
reports presented by the Secretary-General on the
different aspects of the advancement of women, said
that violence against women had its origin in the
historically unequal power relationships between men
and women, and that all forms of violence against
women constituted a major impediment to the ability of7
A/C.3/65/SR.10
women to make use of the capabilities. He hoped that
progress towards achieving gender equality and
women's empowerment would be significantly
reinforced by creation of UN Women, and he
announced that, having presented its candidacy for the
Executive Board of the new entity, Pakistan was
counting on the support of other member States.
46. Pakistan's constitution guaranteed equal rights for
all citizens, without discrimination based on caste,
colour, sex or race. It also guaranteed women's
participation in all areas of public life. Successive
governments had adopted measures to improve the
status of women and to eliminate discrimination in
both public and private sectors so as to ensure their
progressive empowerment. The national strategy
focused on the following actions: reducing the
feminization of poverty, promoting gender equality,
ending violence against women, and adopting
appropriate legislation to remedy structural imbalances
and empower women.
47. Pakistan had been the first Muslim country to
elect a female prime minister, and the first country in
South Asia to have a woman serve as speaker of the
National Assembly. Women held 17 of the 100 seats in
the Senate, and 76 of the 338 in the lower house. In
addition, three Pakistani women had mandates under
special procedures. A national commission on the
status of women had been created in 2000, and a
procedure to give it fully autonomous status was under
way. Pakistan had adopted laws protecting the rights of
women, including one protecting women from
harassment in the workplace. It had also launched the
Benazir Programme of income support, which provided
aid to poor female heads of household.
48. The recent 15-year review of implementation of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action had
highlighted the progress made in working out policies
at the global, regional and national levels, but it had
also revealed persistent inequalities among regions and
within countries in all 12 critical areas of the action
plan. The global economic crisis has worsened the
feminization of poverty. With the 2015 deadline just
five years away, the international community must
redouble its efforts to achieve all the millennium goals
relating to the status of women. Above all, it was
important to preserve international co-operation and
partnerships in this regard. The international
community must honour its commitments relating to
official development assistance, it must extend debt
relief, and it must open markets in particular to female
entrepreneurs.
49. It was important to bear in mind the situation of
women who were suffering the consequences of armed
conflicts and foreign occupation. While many
international bodies had considered their fate in recent
years, the perpetrators of crimes against humanity
continued to enjoy impunity under some countries'
national security laws. The competent bodies of the
United Nations system must strive to remedy the
situation of those women, who were in effect faced
with double discrimination.
50. Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua)
welcomed the creation of UN Women and the
appointment of Michelle Bachelet as its Executive
Director.
51. Eager to promote gender equality and women's
rights, the revolutionary government of Nicaragua was
taking account in its policies of the provisions of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the
outcome documents from the 23rd special session of
the General Assembly, and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and its protocols.
52. When it came to the exercise of power and
decision-making, Nicaragua had launched a
programme (Modelo del Poder Ciudadano) to empower
women by having them participate directly in decision-
making at the national and international levels. More
than 69,000 women were currently participating in that
programme. Mrs. Chamorro also noted that in the 2008
municipal elections 23 women had been elected as
mayors, while parliament had 19 female deputies and
more than 45% of management positions in the country
were held by women.
53. In the education field, the reestablishment of free
schooling had made it possible to enrol more than
800,000 girls and boys. Thanks to the national literacy
campaign (Yo Si Puedo, "Yes I Can"), supported by the
sister republic of Cuba, more than 235,000 women had
learned to read and write.
54. Nicaragua insisted on the right to free health care.
Its family and community-based programme of health
promotion and protection had reduced maternal and
infant mortality since 2006. Since 2007, a number of
infectious diseases had been eradicated and, in 2008,8
A/C.3/65/SR.10
734 sero-positive persons, including 54 pregnant
women, had received antiretroviral treatment.
55. When it came to combating violence against
women, Nicaragua had created special police stations
to assist women, and shelters for victims of family
violence.
56. The Nicaraguan government was convinced that
gender equality and women's empowerment were key
factors in social and economic development. It was
striving to reduce extreme poverty and hunger through
its national human rights programme, which asserted
the right to food security and sovereignty. The goal was
to encourage sustainable development in the context of
the global crisis, through programmes designed to give
80,000 rural families access to the means of production
over a period of five years. These programmes had
benefited from the solidarity and co-operation of the
Bolivarian People's Alliance (ALBA). According to the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO), Nicaragua was one of 16 countries that had
reduced their poverty index.
57. No matter how hard a country might strive to
achieve the millennium development goals, it would be
condemned to poverty and under-development if it
were denied its right to development. Consequently, as
long as co-operation from developed countries
remained limited and saddled with political
considerations, women would be unable to exercise
their basic rights fully.
58. Mrs. Chamorro welcomed adoption of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons. Putting an end to that scourge, of which
women and children were the principal victims, would
require more co-ordinated action at the global level, in
accordance with the principle of shared but
differentiated responsibility.
59. Finally, Nicaragua was concerned that countries
were adopting laws to criminalize migrations, thereby
exposing women to violence and discrimination. It
found unacceptable the capitalist principle that granted
freedom of circulation to goods and capital but
prohibited the movement of workers. The best way to
forestall migrations was to invest in human beings in
developing countries, instead of building repressive
walls, at a time when countries claimed to be fighting
for the essential freedoms of human beings.
60. Mrs. Bouhamidi (Morocco) welcomed the
creation of UN Women and noted with satisfaction the
measures proposed in the Secretary-General's report on
the intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of
violence against women, intended to reduce the
frequency and repercussions of acts of violence against
women. In 2008, as part of its efforts towards the
millennium development goals, Morocco had launched
a "multisectoral programme to combat gender-based
violence by empowering women and girls", which
involved an analysis of the phenomenon of violence,
the offer of services to the victims, legislative reforms,
and public awareness campaigns.
61. Mrs. Bouhamidi stressed the importance both of
protecting women and girls in conflict situations and of
promoting the role of women in peace-building and
national reconstruction, as well as in the economic and
social development of society.
62. Promoting the role and the rights of women was
the centrepiece of the Moroccan government's efforts,
as was evident in the many legal and institutional
reforms enshrining the principle of gender equality
(notably in the Family Code, the Moroccan Nationality
Code, and the electoral law), the presence of ever more
women in representative, executive and judicial
institutions, implementation of a national strategy and
action plan, public awareness campaigns, and annual
publication of a report on gender equality.
63. Mrs. Murphy (Holy See) said that, while much
remained to be done, there had been considerable
progress in many countries in promoting the dignity of
women. Increasing numbers of States are adopting
comprehensive legislation imposing penalties for
violence against women while providing assistance and
protection for victims. It was essential to meet the
short-term needs of victims, by protecting them against
renewed acts of violence, by giving them full access to
the justice system, and by attending to their
psychological and spiritual health, while at the same
time addressing their long-term needs, for example by
providing them with housing and work.
64. Mrs. Murphy welcomed the creation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons and stressed the need for States
to attack the conditions that made women and children
vulnerable to trafficking, such as poverty and lack of
employment and education opportunities. She
considered that legislation on prostitution, child9
A/C.3/65/SR.10
pornography and sexual exploitation should be
reinforced. The safety of trafficked persons and of their
families must be guaranteed at all times. Lastly,
legislation relating to human trafficking must be
strengthened and enforced.
65. The recent report of the Secretary-General on
obstetric fistula (A./65/268) recalled the importance of
protecting the health of women, and especially of
pregnant women and new mothers. Predicating aid to
developing countries on the basis of acceptance of
family planning methods not respectful of the human
person did nothing to advance the health and well-
being of women. What was needed was a human-
centred approach that was fully respectful of the
intrinsic dignity and worth of every person, from
conception to natural death.
66. Mrs. Andamo (Thailand) said that gender
equality and women's empowerment had been
priorities for Thailand since the 1980s. In 2005 her
country had achieved MDG 4 on eliminating gender
disparity in primary and secondary education, and had
reversed the girl/boy ratio in secondary and higher
education. It was currently striving to achieve the so-
called "MDG-plus" targets, which called in particular
for doubling female representation in politics, at both
the local and national levels.
67. At the domestic level, Thailand had made crucial
amendments to existing laws and had implemented
new ones to promote the rights of women, and in
particular married or divorced women. A draft law on
gender equality would prohibit any gender-based
discrimination. At the regional level, Thailand had
worked within the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations to create a commission for the promotion and
protection of women's rights, with a view in particular
to enforcing the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).
68. The measures taken to promote gender equality
and women's empowerment were aimed at all women,
including women in detention, as evidenced by the
exhibit organized by a princess of the royal family to
publicize United Nations rules for the treatment of
female prisoners and non-custodial measures for
women offenders, known as the Bangkok Rules. The
delegation of Thailand hoped that those rules would be
adopted during the 65th session of the General
Assembly.
69. With respect to violence against women, Thailand
had amended its penal code to criminalize wider
categories of sexual violence, and had adopted two
new laws, on marital violence and on the prevention
and suppression of human trafficking. The Thai
government was currently mounting an awareness
campaign under the slogan "Gender Equality Starts at
Home".
70. When it came to combating human trafficking,
Thailand was aware of the multinational dimension of
the problem. It had signed memorandums of
understanding with its neighbours and had participated
in a series of regional meetings, in particular the Bali
Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons
and Related Transnational Crime. As the Secretary-
General had recommended, Thailand considered it
essential to enforce existing bilateral and multilateral
agreements in order to combat trafficking in women
and girls, but it also intended to conclude new
agreements and, in this regard, it welcomed the recent
adoption of the United Nations Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons.
71. Thailand was determined to achieve MDG 5 and
had moved vigorously to ensure health care for poor
rural mothers, with the result that maternal mortality
had declined considerably. It had also taken steps in the
area of child nutrition and breast-feeding, and had
improved family planning, thereby reducing the risks
of mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS.
Thailand was currently considering a bill on
reproductive health and, in this regard, it supported the
Secretary-General's Global Strategy for Women’s and
Children’s Health, convinced that women's health was
an essential factor for stability, peace and productivity.
72. Mrs. Andamo welcomed the creation of UN
Women, and was fully supportive of its mission and of
the appointment of Michelle Bachelet to the position of
Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director.
73. Mr. Zhumabayev (Kazakhstan) congratulated
Michelle Bachelet for her appointment as Under-
Secretary-General and Executive Director of UN
Women. Kazakhstan saw the creation of this new entity
as the "crowning achievement" of four years of
negotiation and debate, and was convinced that it
would give new impetus to promoting women's
interests and their empowerment. It was also confident
that the establishment of an Executive Board for UN
Women would facilitate speedy adoption of measures10
A/C.3/65/SR.10
to remedy the urgent problems in the area of gender
equality. Given the importance of that agency's role,
Kazakhstan had decided to seek membership on the
Board for the Asian Group.
74. In pursuit of MDG 3 (promoting gender equality
and women's empowerment), Kazakhstan, following
the example of other countries, had adopted laws to
guarantee real equality between all citizens and to
protect their rights and freedoms. Its strategy with
respect to gender equality was based on two laws
concerning guarantees of equal rights and opportunities
for men and women, on one hand, and prevention of
marital violence, on the other. A national commission
had been appointed to co-ordinate the work of public
agencies, civil society and international organizations.
Kazakhstan was determined to promote gender equality
and women's participation in national policymaking,
and had placed these matters on the agenda of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe,
when it had held the chair.
75. Kazakhstan had made progress in empowering
women. For example, women currently had a 52%
presence in the business world, compared to 38% in
2000, and women's representation in the lower house
of parliament had risen from 13% to 18%. Women also
constituted 58% of employees of public agencies, and
held 10.3% of management positions, a figure that was
expected to rise to 30% by 2016.
76. Determined to become an advanced industrial
country, prosperous and responsible, Kazakhstan had
adopted a programme of accelerated industrial
development. Women, who represented the better
educated half of society, had a particular role to play in
that process.
77. Lastly, Kazakhstan was committed to pursuing its
efforts for gender equality by adhering to international
standards, developing its legislation, and making its
society more democratic.
78. Mrs. Birabwa Haveland (Norway) hailed the
creation of UN Women and congratulated Michelle
Bachelet on her appointment to the post of Under-
Secretary-General. She hoped that UN Women would
take the lead in ensuring that the various declarations
and resolutions commemorated in 2010 were put to use
and that, above all, it would improve their connection
with the normative and regulatory framework and their
implementation and application on the ground at the
country level. Norway hoped that the new entity would
take a leading role in building the capacities of United
Nations country teams, assisting the resident co-
ordinators, and supporting national gender equality
mechanisms and civil society to bring about change.
Norway stood ready to contribute its political,
technical and financial support.
79. Gender equality was a moral issue. In order to
attack the underlying causes of inequality, the relations
between men and women would have to be
transformed, and men and boys must be engaged as
agents of change to that end. Gender equality was also
a question of rights, including women's fundamental
rights. UN Women should therefore strengthen the
links between the Commission on the Status of
Women, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and the special procedures. Gender
equality was also a question of economic growth and
social development. There was a clear and well
demonstrated correlation between women's health,
their education level and their participation in the
workforce, on one hand, and a nation's economic
performance. The experience of Norway and other
countries had proven that a country did not have to be
rich to have policies that promoted social justice and
equal opportunities. The crucial factor for success was
political will.
80. There were a number of reports to show that the
disadvantaged in most parts of the world were women,
children, in particular girls, and persons with
disabilities. Progress had been made but it was uneven.
It was time, therefore, to mainstream gender equality
and disability considerations in all social development
policies. It was difficult, however, to talk about
women's rights if women continued to be exposed to
violence. Norway strongly supported the Secretary-
General's global campaign to end violence against
women and it had taken measures to fight the menace
at home and abroad.
81. Norway was determined to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals. In particular, it had
taken special responsibility to reduce child mortality
under five years and improve women's health (goals 4
and 5), and in this connection it was actively
supporting the Secretary-General's Global Strategy for
Women's and Children's Health. Various reports
showed that gender equality was the single most
important catalyst for change. Norway had made this a
priority and it urged all nations to follow its example
by implementing the Convention on the Elimination of11
A/C.3/65/SR.10
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the
Beijing Platform for Action and the Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security.
82. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) said that 2010 held great
significance for gender equality and women's
empowerment, as it marked the 15th anniversary of the
Beijing Platform for Action and the 10th anniversary of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security, and it had seen the creation of the
new United Nations Entity on Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN Women). It must be
recognized, however, that obstacles to implementation
of commitments taken in that context still persisted in
2010. Fortunately, women's issues were no longer
isolated from the rest of government policy but were an
integral part of national programmes, in recognition
that gender equality was not only a goal in itself but
also a means of achieving the Millennium
Development Goals. Recalling that Malaysia had
chaired the Economic and Social Council in 2010,
Mr. Rastam hailed the Ministerial Declaration on
international implementation of the agreed objectives
and commitments with respect to gender equality and
women's empowerment, adopted by the Council,
calling it a strong, action-oriented text.
83. Considerable progress had been made in
Malaysia on the gender equality front. Thus, 97% of
girls were enrolled in primary education, and female
enrolment in higher education was 61%, while the
female literacy rate in 2008 was 89.5%. In 2008,
female life expectancy was 76.4 years and the maternal
mortality rate was 0.3 per 1000 live births. To combat
poverty, a microcredit programme for indigent women
had been instituted in 1987. Women currently
constituted 36% of the workforce and this proportion
was expected to grow under the influence of childcare
grants. When it came to combating violence against
women, the government was pursuing a zero-tolerance
policy combined with victim protection, and the Penal
Code had been amended in 2006 to include various
categories of marital violence.
84. Women's participation in the decision-making
process – they held 24.8% of management positions in
2010 – was encouraged by a law dating from 2004. In
2001 the federal constitution had been amended to
prohibit gender-based discrimination. There were still
challenges, however, relating notably to the impact of
the economic crisis and the spread of HIV/AIDS,
which must be addressed in collaboration with civil
society, including NGOs.
85. Mrs. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) supported
the declaration made by the delegate of Yemen on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China. She said that the
question of the advancement of women was crucial, for
it lay at the basis of sustainable development and of
society. She also stressed the importance of specific
national, regional, religious and cultural characteristics
when it came to implementing activities and strategies
for the advancement of women.
86. Determined to honour its international
obligations, the Syrian government had established
institutional mechanisms to supervise and monitor
those activities, particularly as they related to the
protection of women and children. The authorities had
established a comprehensive national project to combat
poverty and had launched a study to identify rural
women's needs, as well as a national strategy for
reproductive health, with objectives in line with the
National Population Strategy and the Health Ministry's
Strategy for 2001-2020 and consistent with goals
agreed at the international level. The Syrian Arab
Republic had introduced interregional, regional and
national training programmes and seminars to raise
public awareness of international instruments for the
advancement of women.
87. In this context, it was imperative to address the
issue of liberating the occupied Syrian territory of
Golan and to establish a just and lasting peace, in order
to put an end to the suffering of the people concerned.
In this regard, attention must be paid to the situation of
women, mainly Syrian women, living in the occupied
territory: this was something that the Secretary-General
had not mentioned in his report on intensification of
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against
women, although the Syrian government had sent him
several letters with detailed information on the
question. Women in the occupied Golan were victims
of arbitrary arrest and detention and were separated
from their families, as they were not authorized to
cross that zone to return to their country, and even
humanitarian cases needed authorization from the
occupying power. Mrs. Alsaleh reiterated the need for a
holistic approach to combating all forms of violence
against women, including women living under foreign
occupation, and she called upon Israel to respect
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. She hailed the creation of the new UN12
A/C.3/65/SR.10
Women, and expressed the hope that it would address,
as it must, the situation of Syrian, Palestinian and
Lebanese women living under foreign occupation.
88. Mrs. Ojiambo (Kenya) supported the respective
declarations of Yemen on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and of Malawi on behalf of the African
Group. She said that her country had made
considerable progress toward gender equality and
women's empowerment since adoption of the Beijing
Platform for Action, establishing legal and institutional
frameworks and incorporating the gender perspective
in its development policies, especially in its "Vision
2030" development plan. It had also established a
national commission on gender equality and
development, a fund for female entrepreneurs, and a
social protection fund, and had implemented a national
action plan on equality, which called for the
appointment of equality officers within government
ministries and enterprises. The new Constitution of
Kenya required that at least 15% of the national budget
should be devolved to the provinces, with a few in
particular to helping women, who accounted for the
majority of the informal SME sector, and guaranteeing
citizens access to land on a footing of equality and with
respect for ownership rights. Parliament had also been
asked to adopt legislation recognizing and protecting
matrimonial property.
89. The Kenyan government had adopted an action
plan to prevent violence and to assist victims, by
facilitating their access to justice, in particular through
the National Commission on Human Rights and
Equality, which had the power to receive complaints
and order reparations. The issue of trafficking in
women and girls remained a great challenge in conflict
or post-conflict situations in Africa. Kenya welcomed
the adoption in August 2010 of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action against trafficking in persons
and was committed to transposing into its domestic
legislation the provisions of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the Additional Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. Lastly, Mrs. Ojiambo praised the work of
UNIFEM, UNDP, UNFPA and UNAIDS, which were
helping developing countries to achieve gender
equality and women's advancement.
90. Mrs. Chisanga-Kondolo (Zambia) supported the
respective declarations of Yemen on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, of Malawi on behalf of the
African Group, and of the United Republic of Tanzania
on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community. She considered it appropriate in 2010 to
reinforce international commitments relating to gender
equality and women's empowerment, but also to assess
the remaining gaps and how to fill them. Promoting
gender equality was an important feature of Zambia's
development strategy. She drew attention to creation of
the Citizen Economic Empowerment Fund intended to
promote women's access to financing. Zambian
financial institutions were also striving to eliminate the
bottlenecks that women still faced in the banking and
financial sectors. On another front, a land reform
programme called for granting 30% of property titles
to women, and a positive discrimination programme
that awarded 25% of scholarships to girls was still in
effect in the education field.
91. Mrs. Chisanga-Kondolo said that Zambia, which
had ratified the CEDAW and other pertinent regional
instruments, was determined to honour its
commitments under those instruments, and it supported
the Secretary-General's "UNiTe to End Violence
against Women" campaign. As well, Parliament was
currently examining a draft law against sexist violence
and a national action plan against that type of violence
had been established. Lastly, Zambia had recently
adopted a law against human trafficking, one that
penalized traffickers and provided protection for
victims. With respect to the Millennium Development
Goals, violence against women and the feminization of
HIV/AIDS remained important challenges for Zambia:
16% of women (versus 12% of men) were affected by
the virus, and the maternal mortality rate was 449 per
100,000 live births. Mrs. Chisanga-Kondolo hoped that
discussions in the context of the Global Strategy for
Women's and Children's Health would address these
challenges. Welcoming the creation of UN Women, she
called on the international community to honour its
development commitments.
92. Mrs. Melón (Argentina) supported the
declarations of the Group of 77 and China and of the
Rio Group. She saw the year 2010 as a milestone,
marking the 15th anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action as well as the
bicentenary of the Argentine Republic.
93. Since adoption of the 1991 law on parliamentary
quotas, Argentina had made progress in terms of
women's participation in political life. Mrs. Melón
listed the positions of responsibility held by women in13
A/C.3/65/SR.10
her country, such as the defence, the industry and
tourism and the social development portfolios, and the
presidency of the central bank, as well as the
presidency of the Republic. This stronger female
presence had made it possible to adopt a series of laws
in favour of women, such as the law on labour union
quotas, the law against human trafficking for purposes
of sexual or occupational exploitation, and the law on
prevention and elimination of violence in interpersonal
relations. Mrs. Melón also mentioned the Social
Security programme, which allowed indigent children
to go to school and guaranteed social and medical
coverage both to children and to the elderly, and which
was benefiting 2 million Argentines, women in
particular.
94. A campaign for gender equality and against
violence had been launched in 2009. The government
was also planning to create an observatory on violence
against women and to take steps to combat human
trafficking. Mrs. Melón renewed her country's
commitment to implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security,
and resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) on
conflict-related sexual violence. She pointed out that it
was at Argentina's initiative that the question of
women, peace and security had been placed on the
agenda of the special meeting of the Southern Common
Market (MERCOSUR) and that of the Inter-American
Commission of Women, and it was in this context that
the Inter-American Year of Women had been
proclaimed. Mrs. Melón congratulated Michelle
Bachelet on her appointment as head of UN Women,
and declared Argentina ready to back her in her new
responsibilities.
95. Mr. Hilmi (Iraq) said the empowerment of
women was an integral part of the Iraqi government's
plan of action, which had been adopted in accordance
with relevant international instruments and the
principle of equal rights and duties. He paid tribute to
Iraqi women, who in the face of terrorism and violence
had shown their courage, supporting their families,
carrying on their work responsibilities, and holding
high-level posts in the new democratic regime.
96. The Iraqi authorities had adopted plans and
strategies to create associations to protect women and
make them aware of their rights. There were plans to
create national women's protection centres, under the
supervision of the Prime Minister, as well as centres
for the re-adaptation, guidance and assistance of
victims of violence. The government had also launched
awareness campaigns to combat female genital
mutilation and crimes of honour. Prison sentences
would be applied for forced marriages and trafficking
in persons, especially women. The constitutional
guarantee of fundamental human rights was the most
important element of protection for women and
children, who represented the demographic majority
and the most vulnerable population groups in the
country.
97. Mr. Hilmi noted that shortcomings in the health
system had had harmful repercussions on women's
rights, not to mention terrorism, which had produced
thousands of widows and orphans. With the
reinforcement of the institutional framework (including
creation of the women's ministry and the parliamentary
committee on women and children) and the legal
framework (including adoption of the citizenship law
in 2006), there was no longer any gender-based
discrimination. With respect to participation in public
life, 27.2% of parliamentarians were women; three
women, including two female ministers of state, were
part of the government; and 87 women held positions
of responsibility. Progress had also been made in this
area in Kurdistan.
The meeting rose a 1.05 p.m.