United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.25
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
27 December 2007
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-56361 (E)
*0756361*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 25th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 25 October 2007, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 106: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 62: Social development (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly
on Ageing (continued)
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/62/SR.25
07-56361 2
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 106: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.12)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.12: Strengthening the
United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme, in particular its technical cooperation
capacity
1. Mr. Maestripieri (Italy), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.12 on the activities carried out
mainly by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), said that although the Commission
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice was the
main body in that field, the Third Committee should
seize the opportunity to guide the work of UNODC
since it was vital to the international community. He
suggested that the Third Committee should consider
the current draft resolution biennially instead of
annually, in order to optimize the results achieved. He
said that Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ghana,
Guatemala, Hungary, Indonesia, Japan, Jordan,
Mexico, Panama, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and the United Republic of
Tanzania had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
2. Ms. Sharma (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution: Albania, Austria, Azerbaijan, Cape
Verde, Chile, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Germany, Honduras, Ireland, Jamaica, Luxembourg,
Moldova, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Poland,
Romania, San Marino, Spain and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Agenda item 62: Social development (continued)
(c) Follow-up to the International Year of Older
Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing
(continued) (A/C.3/62/L.9)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.9: Follow-up to the Second
World Assembly on Ageing
3. The Chairman said that draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.9 contained no programme budget
implications.
4. Ms. Sharma (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Belarus, the Russian Federation and Uzbekistan
had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
5. Ms. Nawaz (Pakistan) said that, after
consultations with the Group of 77 and China, it had
been agreed that the following revisions should be
made to the draft resolution: paragraph 10 should read
“... to provide care and protection to persons as they
age and to evaluate improvements in the health status
of older persons, including on a gender-specific basis,
and to reduce disability and mortality”. The beginning
of paragraph 12 should read “Recommends to the
Commission for Social Development to include in
deliberations of its forty-sixth session in 2008 the
outcomes of the first cycle of the review ...”. She noted
that Andorra, Iceland, Kazakhstan, Montenegro,
Norway, Portugal and the Republic of Korea had joined
the sponsors of the draft resolution.
6. Ms. Sharma (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution: Albania, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Cyprus, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Hungary,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
7. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.9, as orally revised,
was adopted.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/62/36, 369 and 464)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/62/183, 207, 212, 214,
218, 222, 225, 227, 254-5, 265, 280, 286-9, 293,
298, 304, 317; A/C.3/62/3)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/62/213, 223, 263-4, 275, 313, 318, 354 and
498)
8. Ms. Jilani (Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the situation of human rightsA/C.3/62/SR.25
3 07-56361
defenders), introducing her report (A/62/225), said that
the report focused on the right to protest in the context
of freedom of assembly, as a manifestation of the
fundamental freedoms of expression, assembly and
movement. Respect for the right to peaceful protest
was essential not only for promoting the defence of
human rights, but also for the cause of democracy and
pluralism. Nevertheless, the exercise of that right was
too often limited and suppressed. In that regard, she
drew attention to the situation in Myanmar, a patent
illustration of the denial of the freedom to protest, and
expressed her concern about the situation of human
rights defenders in that country. She noted that States
had an obligation to create the appropriate conditions
for the expression of opinions, and therefore the
exercise of the right to protest. She cited examples
from her report which illustrated situations that had
raised concern during the period under consideration
and which had prompted her to send communications
to the States concerned.
9. Ms. Lopes (Portugal), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, expressed the European Union’s
support for the Special Representative. It was of utmost
importance that human rights defenders should be able
to work freely, and the mandate of the Special
Representative contributed to the achievement of that
objective. The decision to focus the report on the right
to protest in the context of the freedom of assembly
was particularly pertinent since the freedoms of
expression and opinion, association and peaceful
assembly continued to be regularly violated. She would
welcome information from the Special Representative
concerning several questions. She asked how the
regional mechanisms such as the African Commission
on Human and Peoples’ Rights, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights and the Council of
Europe had responded to the Special Representative’s
work and recommendations; whether any States had
refused to receive the Special Representative; what
country visits the Special Representative planned to
make in the months ahead, and in which countries the
human rights situation had worsened in 2007. She
would also like to know what the Third Committee
could do to help improve the situation in those
countries, and to help protect people who had been
threatened for cooperating with the Special
Representative. She also wished to know whether
persons demonstrating in favour of protection of the
environment should be regarded as human rights
defenders.
10. Ms. González (Cuba) asked, with regard to the
Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote
and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms, whether the Special
Representative had considered studying the duty of
protesters, either groups or individuals, to conduct their
protests within legal frameworks. She also wondered
whether the Special Representative intended to address
the effects that the adoption and implementation of
counter-terrorism laws had had on the work of human
rights activists, in particular the measures that had been
taken against anti-globalization protesters who worked
for world peace.
11. Mr. Heines (Norway) commended the Special
Representative on the manner in which she was
discharging her mandate. With regard to the anti-
globalization movement, the Special Representative
referred in her report to situations in which marginal
and violent elements at peaceful demonstrations had
caught the attention of the media. As a result, the
“human rights” dimension of the protests was often
relegated to second place. He enquired what States
could do in order to avoid that type of situation, taking
into account the duty not to interfere and the positive
obligation of States to protect those who exercised
their right to protest.
12. Ms. Sutikno (Indonesia) thanked the Special
Representative, who had visited Indonesia in 2007, and
said her country looked forward to the report on the
visit which the Special Representative would be
submitting to the Human Rights Council at its 2008
session. With regard to the issue brought to the
Committee’s attention by the Special Representative,
she said that the right to freedom of peaceful assembly
was guaranteed by the Indonesian Constitution and
that, in practice and in daily life, meetings and protests
in exercise of the freedoms of opinion and assembly
were characteristic of Indonesia’s new democratic
society. Referring to the right to protest, she asked
how, in the opinion of the Special Representative,
legislation introduced in order to guarantee the
peaceful exercise of the right to protest could
counteract the negative effects of laws that were
frequently accused of restricting that right.
13. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran)
said that his delegation had serious misgivings and
questions regarding both the Special Representative’s
report, and the nature and priority of her mandate. HeA/C.3/62/SR.25
07-56361 4
asked how the many United Nations Member States
facing serious problems such as poverty,
unemployment or contagious diseases could conceive
of the right to protest and the right to strike as priority
issues, pointing out that the report did not seem to refer
to the international legal basis for the right to protest or
to balanced safeguards that could protect the stability
and security of Member States from out-of-control
demonstrations or strikes. Even the European system
for the protection of human rights provided for such
safeguards, including peaceful nature, legality,
proportionality and good administration, in its
guidelines on the drafting of legislation on freedom of
peaceful assembly. He asked whether, given the
magnitude and overlapping nature of the questions
raised in her reports, the Special Representative would
not agree that she was overstepping her mandate and
that the Human Rights Council should take an
immediate decision to streamline that mandate and
replace it with a high-priority issue.
14. Mr. Nagan (Netherlands) said that his delegation
fully endorsed the statement made by the
representative of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union and, like other delegations, wished to thank the
Special Representative for the manner in which she
was discharging her mandate, which provided
considerable support to those who often risked their
own lives to defend civil and political liberties. Noting
that, in her report, the Special Representative gave an
overview of the work done by the international and
regional monitoring mechanisms to protect the right of
human rights defenders to protest, he would be grateful
if she would share her views on the way in which the
international community could help human rights
defenders to make full use of those mechanisms. In the
report, the Special Representative referred to various
categories of human rights defenders, and he welcomed
the attention she had devoted to those who acted to
protect the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender individuals, who, as well as facing threats
from certain Governments, were also the victims of
social discrimination. He asked what the international
community could do to assist those defenders with
their legitimate mission.
15. Mr. Llanos (Chile) thanked the Special
Representative on the situation of human rights
defenders for her report and oral introduction. In
chapter III, section H, of the report, entitled “Protests
linked to land rights and environmental claims”, a
paragraph about Chile contained serious inaccuracies,
which he wished to clarify. The paragraph stated that
the son of a leader of a Mapuche community had been
charged under anti-terrorism legislation, which was
incorrect, since the person in question had been
charged under various articles of the Penal Code. As a
State based on the rule of law, Chile could not accept
violence as a means of ensuring that a citizen’s
demands were heard, whether or not that citizen was a
member of an indigenous community. Chile had
implemented a number of institutional mechanisms to
respond to the demands of all segments of the
population, and a special body had been established to
protect the rights of indigenous peoples. In Chile, no
indigenous person had been arrested or convicted for
having asserted his or her land rights.
16. Ms. Blitt (Canada) said that Canada was
seriously concerned about the harassment of human
rights defenders in Zimbabwe, particularly women who
took part in peaceful protests, described in the Special
Representative’s report, the quality of which was
commendable. Noting that the Special Rapporteur of
the African Commission on Human Rights Defenders
in Africa was also following that issue, she enquired
whether the Special Representative had other
opportunities to collaborate with regional mechanisms
in order to better protect women defenders of civil and
political liberties. With regard to the Special
Representative’s concern that restrictions on the right
to protest in connection with elections could challenge
the integrity of the latter, which constituted a central
foundation of democracy, she said that defenders of
political liberties who called for free and fair elections
or denounced irregular electoral practices were often
arrested or arbitrarily detained. In that connection, she
enquired whether it would be possible for other special
procedures to help the Special Representative to
protect defenders in such situations.
17. Ms. Oinonen (Finland) thanked the Special
Representative for her outstanding work. In the report,
the Special Representative highlighted the additional
risks often faced by women human rights defenders
when participating in collective public action and noted
that those risks were linked to the traditional role of
women in some societies, she said that Finland had
carefully studied the recommendations set out in the
report, particularly those to the effect that instances of
gender-based violence against women defenders
occurring during demonstrations should be investigatedA/C.3/62/SR.25
5 07-56361
and prosecuted as a matter of priority and that law
enforcement officials should receive training on
protection measures to be taken with regard to children
taking part in demonstrations with their mothers. She
would be grateful to hear any recommendations the
Special Representative might have on specific
measures to strengthen protection for women human
rights defenders taking part in collective public action.
In addition, Finland attached importance to the
recommendation relating to the use and adaptation to
national and regional contexts of the Guidelines on
Freedom of Assembly drafted by the Office of
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and would like to know more about the way in which
the Special Representative thought that those
Guidelines could be used to promote and protect the
rights of women who defended human rights.
18. Mr. Rees (United States of America) thanked the
Special Representative for her report and said that his
delegation strongly supported the recommendation that
States should be more tolerant of criticism, view
human rights defenders as a resource and take
advantage of their knowledge. Human rights defenders
and NGOs raised awareness of freedoms, condemned
abuses, called for change and compelled Governments
to be answerable for their actions. The United States
was a strong supporter of human rights defenders and,
in 2006, had established a fund in order to provide
rapid financial, medial or legal support to activists who
were being repressed by their Governments. The report
stressed the need for States to adhere more strictly to
the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders; in that
connection, he enquired whether the Special
Representative could suggest any ways to disseminate
the Declaration more effectively in order to increase its
impact. He thanked the Special Representative for
having drawn attention to the terrible situation of
human rights defenders in Burma.
19. Ms. Viotti (Brazil) thanked the Special
Representative for her introduction and for her ongoing
efforts in discharging her mandate. The
recommendations made by the Special Representative
following her visit to Brazil in December 2005 had
helped Brazil to assess its own situation, and most of
the recommendations had been implemented by means
of Government action plans.
20. Mr. Myint (Myanmar) said that his delegation
had already described the background to the events in
Myanmar, namely a complex political transition. While
those had been tragic events of international concern,
all references to the situation should now cease.
21. Mr. Zheglov (Russian Federation) said that a
study of the issue of the right to protest in the context
of freedom of assembly did not fall under the Special
Representative’s mandate and that in her report, the
term “defender” was arbitrarily defined, with no
account taken of cultural criteria. In addition, peaceful
protests were sometimes motivated by factors that went
beyond the defence of human rights and were capable
of undermining State structures. If human rights
defenders had special status, then his delegation
wished to know what punishment should be imposed
on them in the event of their acting excessively. In his
view, the Special Representative had exceeded her
mandate and her report and recommendations were
questionable.
22. Ms. Jilani (Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the situation of human rights
defenders) said that her report dealt with the right to
peaceful protest, which was a part of the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly. Her mandate stemmed
from the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and
was rooted in actions to protect freedom of assembly.
With regard to her interaction with regional bodies,
since taking over the mandate, she had been
instrumental in strengthening cooperation between
those bodies and the United Nations system, in
particular in establishing, within the African
Commission on Human Rights, a special rapporteur on
human rights defenders and, within the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, a special human rights
defenders unit. Such cooperation had involved sharing
experiences and informing each other of the best ways
to address problems, taking account of country needs
and realities on the ground. Responding to the question
posed by Cuba, she recalled that, pursuant to article 18
of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
everyone had duties towards and within the
community. However, they must respect the law and
democratic process. In many regions, it was the denial
of economic and social rights that prompted human
rights defenders to act, provoking a response by the
State that undermined the civil and political rights of
the individual. The exercise of the right to peaceful
protest should not undermine State security; legitimate
means existed to enable public institutions to maintain
State security when faced with unacceptable methodsA/C.3/62/SR.25
07-56361 6
of protest. Law enforcement agents must learn to
distinguish between peaceful protests and attacks on
law and order and to take proper account of the needs
of women and children who participated in peaceful
protests or were bystanders. She hoped that the
peaceful protest guidelines would be widely
disseminated and adopted by a growing number of
countries. Freedom of assembly, freedom of movement
and freedom of information should be strengthened in
national legislation, and any restrictions must be
reasonable. It was her view that she had never
exceeded her mandate.
22. Mr. Despouy (Special Rapporteur on the
independence of judges and lawyers) said that the
increasing number of interventions in 2006 showed
how difficult it was for members of the judiciary to act
in full independence and safety. Unfortunately, they
were not adequately protected by Governments and
were exposed to harassment, intimidation, vilification
and threats which could lead to forced disappearance,
assassination or extrajudicial executions. He
condemned the delays in the administration of justice
and the corruption that sometimes impeded the
workings of the judicial system. In many cases, judicial
reform had only further paralysed the judiciary. There
had been many complaints of indefinite detention
without charge or trial, the trial of civilians by military
courts and the trial of members of the armed forces by
those same courts for serious violations of human
rights, as well as the establishment of special courts
and the enactment of anti-terrorism legislation or
legislation relating to national security and the right to
asylum which limited recourse to the justice system
and granted excessive powers to the executive.
23. An expert seminar would shortly be held to
examine the issue of human rights during states of
emergency and make recommendations in that regard.
It was a matter of concern that in many countries, the
most vulnerable members of society continued not to
have access to justice. He also deplored the lack of
resources that impeded the workings of the judiciary,
the fact that courts were located in large cities rather
than rural areas, the lack of access to judicial
information, the prohibitive cost of court cases and the
quasi-total paralysis of the judiciary in times of
conflict.
24. The Special Rapporteur drew attention to the lack
of cooperation between the Government of the Sudan
and the International Criminal Court and the lack of a
relationship agreement between the Court and the
African Union, a circumstance which hampered
investigations and put at risk the appearance of
suspects before the Court. He urged the Government of
Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army to reach an
agreement that precluded any type of amnesty for war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide or grave
violations of human rights, thereby striking a balance
between the need to see justice done and the need to
achieve lasting peace in the region. It was regrettable
that despite his insistent appeals, the last survivor of
the six people implicated in the attack against the
United Nations office in Baghdad had been executed,
which he considered to be a denial of the right to truth
of the victims’ families. He drew attention to the
unanimous adoption of the Internal Rules of the courts
of Cambodia and the arrests of two high-ranking
Khmer Rouge leaders, and said that the national and
international judges were determined to complete the
trials in a timely manner, in accordance with the
principles of equity, impartiality and transparency. He
drew attention to the alarming state of the judicial
system in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
particular the inadequate number of judicial personnel
and courts, their inadequate remuneration, the
interference by the executive authorities and the army,
the difficulty in gaining access to justice and the lack
of enforcement of court decisions. He would be
visiting the Russian Federation and Guatemala as well
as Fiji, where the Chief Justice had been removed in
the wake of a coup d’état.
25. Ms. Lopes (Portugal), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, asked how the international
community and United Nations human rights
mechanisms might contribute to efforts to combat the
corruption that plagued the judiciary in certain
countries and requested information on the expert
seminar on human rights in the context of states of
emergency. She wondered whether the Special
Rapporteur believed that it would be possible to
maintain the planned timetable of work.
26. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico) asked what
recommendations the Special Rapporteur planned to
make to the United Nations system and international
community to promote access to justice.
27. Mr. González (Costa Rica) asked the Special
Rapporteur to comment on the link between
development and access to justice, and detail measures
to be taken to promote access to justice.A/C.3/62/SR.25
7 07-56361
28. Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) noted that the Sudan had not
ratified the Rome Statute that had established the
International Criminal Court. The Court was thus not
competent to examine matters concerning the Sudan,
which possessed its own independent judicial system.
Three domestic tribunals had been established in the
three states of Darfur and were now functioning. The
Special Rapporteur should not engage in any sparring
match, but should keep within his mandate.
29. Mr. Zheglov (Russian Federation) said that his
country stood ready to welcome the Special Rapporteur
and facilitate his visit and his meetings in the Russian
Federation in every possible way.
30. Mr. Poli (Brazil) said that the Government of
Brazil had taken account of the recommendations of
the Special Rapporteur in its reform of the judicial
system.
31. Mr. Argüello (Argentina) said that Argentina was
in the process of reforming its military justice system
to bring it in line with international law and planned to
abolish the death penalty still applicable in its Military
Justice Code. He asked whether the Special Rapporteur
would be attending the seminar on respect for human
rights during states of emergency and what impact the
seminar might have on the development of
international humanitarian law.
32. Mr. Llanos (Chile) said that his country would be
participating actively in the seminar announced by the
Special Rapporteur and asked what proposals the
Special Rapporteur would be making in order to
facilitate access to justice.
33. Mr. Navoti (Fiji) thanked the Special Rapporteur.
The reference to his country in the report reflected the
international community’s genuine concern with his
country’s justice system. His Government would
follow up the Special Rapporteur’s request for an
invitation.
34. Ms. Pi (Uruguay) thanked the Special Rapporteur
for his report and his participation in the seminar on
the right to truth that had been held in her country. She
welcomed the fact that another seminar would be held
on human rights protection during states of emergency.
She asked the Special Rapporteur what impact the
declaration to be adopted by the seminar was expected
to have on the work of the Human Rights Council.
35. Ms. Abdelhak (Algeria), commended the work of
the Special Rapporteur and asked what results he
expected from the seminar and what general
conclusions he drew from the individual cases
mentioned in his report.
36. Ms. Norin (United States of America) thanked
the Special Rapporteur and asked whether there had
been any developments with regard to his request for
an invitation to visit Iran.
37. Ms. Lebedinsky (Switzerland) commended the
Special Rapporteur on his report and expressed the
hope that the Special Rapporteur’s report would
address the issue of transitional justice, which was an
issue of great concern to his country.
38. Ms. Sutikno (Indonesia) welcomed the work of
the Special Rapporteur and highlighted the importance
of the independence of the judiciary to her country,
which had recently established a judicial oversight
commission whose tasks included monitoring such
independence. She supported the recommendation that
the United Nations and other relevant international
agencies should provide assistance to countries, on
request, to bring their judicial apparatus into line with
international standards.
39. Ms. Borjas Chávez (El Salvador) thanked the
Special Rapporteur. Emphasizing the importance of the
issue, she said that her country was working to
strengthen the independence of judges, particularly
through constitutional reforms. She asked what
challenges were faced by developing countries with
regard to training, particularly in the area of ethics.
40. Mr. Abubaker (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), having
commended the Chairman, asked the Special
Rapporteur which criteria determined fairness and
transparency in a given judicial system and when the
Committee would hear reports that were free of
selectivity and politicization.
41. Mr. Despouy (Special Rapporteur on the
independence of judges and lawyers) thanked the
representatives for their comments and questions. With
regard to the seminar on human rights protection
during states of emergency, he noted the interest
expressed by several Latin American countries, which
was understandable given the serious human rights
violations that had occurred in those countries in the
1970s. However, at the present time, human rights
were severely curtailed in the name of national
security, even in countries that had traditionally
protected them. The aim of the seminar shouldA/C.3/62/SR.25
07-56361 8
therefore be a universal declaration that guaranteed
that, even during a state of emergency, the authorities
in all countries respected international standards. In
addition, he hoped that the Human Rights Council
would appoint a Special Rapporteur to ensure the
implementation of that declaration. In reply to the
representative of the European Union, he emphasized
the need to follow closely the situation in Cambodia,
where international cooperation in the promotion of
justice had led to progress in establishing extraordinary
chambers in that country. Even more should be done to
provide marginalized populations, especially in rural
areas, with access to justice. In reply to the
representative of Costa Rica, he said that development
programmes had a significant role to play in that area,
by strengthening institutions and increasing citizens’
autonomy. In reply to the representative of the Sudan,
he noted that the Security Council had brought the case
of Darfur to the International Criminal Court in
accordance with article 13, paragraph (b), of the Rome
Statute. The Pre-Trial Division of the Court had
confirmed the charges against Mr. Ahmad Harun and
Mr. Ali Kushayb. He took due note of the explanations
given by the Sudan about the administration of justice
in that country.
42. He reiterated his appreciation to the Russian
Federation for its invitation and said he looked forward
to visiting that country in May 2008. He also
welcomed the fact that Brazil had followed his
recommendations and made constitutional and
institutional changes to improve the administration of
justice. He commended the reform of the Code of
Military Justice under way in Argentina and noted that
the death penalty could be applied only if all
guarantees of due process were respected and that he
was in favour of a universal moratorium. In reply to the
representative of Algeria, he pointed out that his
statements referred both to specific cases and to
structural problems, and that they concerned all
countries. In closing, he thanked Member States for
their cooperation and said that justice would continue
to progress through the efforts of countries that were
committed to protecting human rights.
43. Ms. Ertürk (Special Rapporteur on violence
against women, its causes and consequences),
introducing her report, said that the report examined
how cultural specificity was used to justify violence
against women. She stressed the need to combat such
violence in a comprehensive manner by addressing the
true political and economic causes of violations of
women’s rights. In 2006 she had visited Turkey,
Sweden and the Netherlands. In Turkey, she had found
that oppression by family members and the wider
society drove many women to suicide. She thanked the
Turkish Government for making available follow-up
information to her mission, welcomed the
Government’s intention to combat honour crimes and
violence against women and encouraged it to intensify
its efforts. In the Netherlands, she had observed that
inequalities persisted in the labour market, with women
of foreign background being doubly disadvantaged by
discrimination linked to a cultural perspective. In
Sweden, she had noted that women remained
underrepresented in senior management positions in
some sectors, the extent of family violence was
disturbing and there were gaps in the implementation
of the penal framework for the protection of women.
44. In 2007, she had visited Algeria, Ghana and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In Algeria, she had
noted progress in legislation and in the educational
system but there remained gaps in the labour market
and the newly formed Family Code did not resolve
issues of discrimination within the family. Violence
against women in the private sphere remained
pervasive, but policy measures had been taken to
address harassment and sexual abuse in public
institutions. Women still suffered from the legacy of
the “Black Decade”. In Ghana, violence against women
was all too prevalent, although certain practices that
had been criminalized were on the decrease. The main
victims were girls, women accused of witchcraft and
widows. It was difficult to ensure that traditional
authorities were fully engaged in enforcing laws
adopted by the Government in accordance with
Ghana’s international commitments. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, armed groups continued to
commit extreme violence against women with virtual
impunity. Survivors were stigmatized and did not
receive the compensation to which they were entitled.
Given the nature of the conflict in the country, the
international community, in cooperation with the
Congolese authorities, had a responsibility to protect
women, especially in South Kivu. Several regional
consultations had enabled her better to understand local
specificities, as well as to support national and regional
civil society initiatives. She called on donors to support
those initiatives. She welcomed the invitations
extended by the Governments of Saudi Arabia and
Tajikistan to visit those countries in 2008. She had alsoA/C.3/62/SR.25
9 07-56361
made requests to visit Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan.
45. Her next report would focus on indicators of
violence against women, as reliable statistics would
enable States better to target their actions. Violence
against women had become a major agenda item within
the work of the United Nations and its entities, but
cooperation was needed among relevant actors,
especially the Commission on the Status of Women and
mandated experts. The move to Geneva of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women would imply both advantages and
disadvantages, but she trusted that the General
Assembly would provide guidance to address the latter.
46. Mr. Aksen (Turkey) commended the work of the
Special Rapporteur and stressed that his Government
was determined to combat violence against women, as
shown by the institutional and legislative measures
recently taken, especially with regard to honour crimes.
He asked the Special Rapporteur what measures she
recommended with a view to raising public awareness
of the problem.
47. Ms. Lopes (Portugal), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, thanked the Special Rapporteur and
expressed appreciation for the Special Rapporteur’s
visit to two member States of the European Union in
2006. She cited the measures taken by several States
more effectively to combat domestic violence and
requested the Special Rapporteur to share with Member
States good practices drawn from her experience. She
asked what measures the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the international community could take to
eliminate grave acts of violence committed against
women in that country, and what the international
community could do to ensure that cultural specificities
were not used to justify violence against women.
48. Ms. Blitt (Canada) thanked the Special
Rapporteur and said that she awaited with interest the
report on indicators of violence against women. She
wondered whether common indicators would be useful,
considering the major differences between some
countries and whether, in addition to the acts of
violence themselves, other factors would be considered
in measuring such violence. Finally, she asked how
other United Nations bodies could contribute to the
Special Rapporteur’s work.
49. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico) commended the Special
Rapporteur; he asked what obstacles had been
encountered in the preparation of the report on
indicators and whether the Special Rapporteur had
found common indicators that could be applied to all
countries. He also asked her views on the term
“femicide” (“femicidio”) recently adopted by ECLAC.
50. Mr. Akindele (Nigeria) said that, as knowledge
conquered all (scientia omnia vincit), a large-scale
educational effort could be expected gradually to
eliminate the negative influence of cultural factors that
explained why violence against women was still very
prevalent in the world. He asked what measures should
be taken in order for education to make a useful
contribution to the elimination of such violence,
especially in rural areas.
51. Ms. Abdelhak (Algeria) said she looked forward
to the recommendations that would no doubt be
contained in the report of the Special Rapporteur to the
Human Rights Council after her visit to Algeria. As in
all other countries, there was violence against women
in Algeria, but the authorities were aware of it and
spared no effort to eradicate it, with the cooperation of
society as a whole. Rather than focus on individual
cases, however, the report to the Human Rights
Council should address general factors explaining such
violence.
52. Ms. Sutikno (Indonesia) said that her country
was party to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and wished to
reassure the Special Rapporteur that her conclusions
would be carefully studied by the Indonesian
Government. A bill had been brought before Parliament
aimed at raising to 30 per cent the number of women
elected to Parliament. She asked what proposals would
be helpful in eliminating the problem of violence
against women, which Indonesia also faced.
53. Ms. Woldberg (Netherlands) said that a major
report on the emancipation of women in the
Netherlands had recently been issued. The Netherlands
would continue to support United Nations activities to
eliminate violence against women.
54. Ms. Ertürk (Special Rapporteur on violence
against women, its causes and consequences),
responding to comments by delegations, noted that
action to eliminate violence against women was widely
accepted as part of a common agenda, and that she
received expressions of support more often than
disagreement. She had visited 14 countries with widely
varying cultures, where gender inequality frequentlyA/C.3/62/SR.25
07-56361 10
persisted, but had always encountered an eagerness to
tackle those problems, with varying degrees of success.
Domestic violence, usually against women, was found
in all countries, whether rich or poor, and was
attributed to a wide variety of factors, such as
alcoholism or unemployment. However, its structural
causes — essentially inequality in the exercise of
power — must not be forgotten. Further work was
therefore needed to change attitudes, in particular the
way in which the concept of power was understood.
Impunity was an invitation to continue behaviours like
domestic violence, which might lead to the conclusion
that punishment in one form or another would be the
solution. The idea of punishment or penalty should be
approached with care, however, as quite often battered
women did not want their husbands to go to prison.
More innovative methods, such as restraining orders,
must therefore be found; more generally, ways must be
found to support the family and pay the rent if the
father was jailed. Those were difficult problems to
which there was no perfect solution, and no model
practices were known that could be disseminated.
Bolder innovation was needed in that area. The
problem of non-State actors was acute, because they
were often the perpetrators of human rights violations
reported; in such cases, the State must be held
accountable for not exercising appropriate vigilance.
For example, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
there were a multitude of actors from armed groups,
which had nothing to do with the State, and which
often committed violations, against women in
particular. The problem should therefore be addressed
by the international community, which should have
ideas about ways to eliminate that type of violence.
55. Turning to indicators of domestic violence, she
said that domestic violence was difficult to measure
and even its definition was in dispute. It was not easy
to find comparable indicators; major work was in
progress on social indicators in general and on
domestic violence in particular, which suggested that
indicators that would easily allow comparisons
between countries were rare indeed. Prevalence
indicators were currently the most widely available,
but they gave no indication of the seriousness of the
violence; there was therefore no practical or easy
solution to the problem of indicators. The concept of
“femicide” would be addressed in the report to be
submitted to the Human Rights Council. Death
statistics were widely available and it should be
possible to spot differences in mortality between men
and women, but the way in which those statistics were
kept varied from one country to another and were not
always comparable.
56. On the issue of culture and education, she said
that education was both a fundamental right and a
citizenship right. It was quite discouraging that it did
not seem possible to solve the problem of education, in
particular the education of girls and women, because of
a lack of resources. The issue of encouraging girls to
continue their studies must also be addressed. She
noted, however, that schooling was not always a
guarantee of avoiding the problem of domestic
violence: the educated classes were not exempt from it
either. Many countries already had excellent laws, but
they must be enforced, because what was ultimately
needed was a change in mindset. A cultural negotiation
must begin: the State must participate in a direct
relationship with local communities in order to be able
to question cultural norms that were sometimes in
direct contradiction to women’s exercise of their rights.
But who spoke on behalf of the culture? Courage was
required to eliminate negative cultural factors.
Statements in exercise of the right of reply
57. The Chairman said that several representatives
had asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply in
reference to the statement made on behalf of the
European Union at the 22nd meeting.
58. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran)
said that his country was concerned that the European
Union, while denouncing Iran, was closing its eyes to
the situation of human rights in the territories of the
European Union, which in some cases was pathetic:
minorities were oppressed, asylum-seekers sent home;
xenophobia was widespread, and people sometimes
lived in ghetto-like conditions; there were secret
detention centres and illegal transfers of detainees. He
wondered, therefore, how the European Union could
teach Iran a lesson. Neither the European Union or any
other group of countries could claim a monopoly on
the protection of human rights. Serious attention must
be paid to such pretentions.
59. Many countries in the world (107 Member States
by his count) retained the death penalty in their penal
codes. Other countries could not arrogate the right to
dispute the reasons put forward for imposing the death
penalty for very serious crimes (terrorism, drug
trafficking, sabotage). Iran saw the death penalty as aA/C.3/62/SR.25
11 07-56361
very important means of deterrence, and the criticism
of the European Union was therefore unjust: to fight
terrorist groups, an adequate criminal arsenal was
needed. Not infrequently, members of the European
Union harboured terrorists in their territories and put
other countries in danger. The Iranian Government had
applied a zero-tolerance policy to drug traffickers,
which called for appropriate punishment. Iran therefore
categorically rejected the baseless allegations of the
European Union. The Islamic Republic of Iran would
not give in to pressure or expressions of disapproval
from other countries. Relations among States should be
based on mutual respect, and his country was ready for
a constructive dialogue on human rights with all
countries.
60. Mr. Botora (Ethiopia) said that at the 22nd
meeting, the European Union had accused Ethiopia of
gross violations of human rights, but had not
mentioned the mass killings, mainly of Chinese
nationals, committed in Ogaden by the Ogaden
National Liberation Front with the undoubted support
of agents from outside Ethiopia. The concern of the
European Union was therefore groundless. The media,
for its part, had added its own distortions. Ethiopia
believed that it was for the United Nations to conduct
its own evaluation of the situation. His country was
prepared to cooperate with the United Nations and
would not in any way prevent access by United Nations
personnel to Ethiopian territory for an evaluation on
the ground. The position taken by the European Union
was therefore unhelpful. In addition, the facts were
being reported in a distorted way. Nevertheless, his
country continued to require humanitarian assistance to
ensure greater respect for human rights.
61. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that she
was surprised at the reaction of the European Union to
her country’s efforts to resolve the situation of
refugees; the representative of the European Union had
made some baseless accusations. Syria had always
observed the greatest respect for human rights and had
applied the means to protect human rights, in terms of
its domestic law and economic, social and religious
specificities. The commitments undertaken in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights were enshrined
in its Constitution. However, dialogue on human rights
should observe the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of States.
62. Mr. Jang Il-Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that, regrettably, the representative of
Portugal, speaking on behalf of the European Union,
had stated that his country was not open to dialogue on
human rights, and that the European Union would
therefore be submitting a draft resolution on the
subject. Although he had little interest in what the
European Union decided about submitting a draft
resolution, he would like to clarify the facts: high-level
political discussions on human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had indeed been taking
place since 2001. A delegation from the European
Union had come to his country and had visited prisons
and met with prisoners and magistrates. It was the
European Union which had unilaterally decided to
break off the dialogue on human rights. The issue of
human rights coincided with the consideration of
nuclear questions. In fact, it was the European Union
which had rejected and interrupted the dialogue, and
the door was not closed to dialogue, although his
country could no longer trust the European Union.
There had been no change in his country’s position on
human rights. He regretted that the draft resolution was
politically motivated.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.