United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.39
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
28 December 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-59419 (E)
*1259419*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 39th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 16 November 2012, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
Agenda item 104: International drug control (continued)
Agenda item 103: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)A/C.3/67/SR.39
12-59419 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 p.m.
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.59: Report of the Human
Rights Council
1. Mr. Mendonça (Cape Verde), speaking on behalf
of the African Group, introduced the draft resolution,
which took note of the report of the Human Rights
Council and the recommendations contained therein.
The Group hoped for the adoption of the resolution by
consensus and encouraged all Member States to
become sponsors.
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.57: International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination
2. Ms. Ponikvar (Slovenia), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the main sponsors, said that
Andorra, Armenia, Belarus, Benin, Chile, Croatia,
Georgia, Guatemala, Iceland, Italy, Liechtenstein,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, Senegal, Thailand and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had also joined the
sponsors.
3. The biennial draft resolution, calling for the
effective implementation of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, was divided into three parts. The first
part of the draft resolution focused on the work of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination; the second part considered the
financial situation of the Committee, urging States
parties to ratify the amendment to the Convention
concerning the financing of the Committee and
requesting the Secretary-General to provide adequate
resources; the third section, on the status of the
Convention, called for its universal ratification.
4. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Guinea, Haiti, Lebanon,
Madagascar, Mali, Panama, the Republic of Moldova,
San Marino and South Sudan had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 104: International drug control
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.14/Rev.1: International
cooperation against the world drug problem
4. Ms. Morgan (Mexico), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Afghanistan, Belize, El Salvador,
Honduras, Mongolia and Ukraine had joined the
sponsors.
5. With a view to strengthening the international
community’s strategy, the text requested the Secretary-
General to convene a special session of the General
Assembly to address international cooperation against
the world drug problem at the highest political level
following the March 2014 session of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs. She called on delegations to
support the draft resolution so that the international
community could address the problem together.
6. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Haiti, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Mali, the Philippines, Tunisia and the United Republic
of Tanzania had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 103: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.16/Rev.1: Improving the
coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons
7. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
presenting a statement of programme budget
implications in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, said that the report
requested in paragraph 10 would require no additional
resources.
8. The high-level meeting of the General Assembly
referred to in paragraph 12 could be held over a
maximum of three days of two meetings each, with
interpretation in the official languages, using the
meeting entitlement of the General Assembly, provided
that the high-level meeting was not held in parallel
with other General Assembly meetings. It would
therefore not require additional resources unless the
meeting requirements increased.
9. The open-ended informal consultations referred
to in paragraph 13 would use the meeting entitlement
of the General Assembly provided that they were not
held in parallel with other General Assembly meetings,
and would therefore not require additional resources.A/C.3/67/SR.39
3 12-59419
10. The documentation requested in paragraph 15
would add one document of 10,700 words, issued in
the official languages, to the workload of the
Department of General Assembly and Conference
Management, incurring additional requirements of
$62,300, for which no provision had been made in the
2012-2013 budget. Additional funds would therefore
need to be allocated.
11. The report referred to in paragraph 14 would not
require additional resources.
12. The adoption of draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.16/Rev.1 would therefore incur additional
requirements of $62,300. However, every effort should
be made to absorb those requirements within existing
resources under section 2 of the programme budget and
to report thereon in the context of the second
performance report for the biennium 2012-2013.
13. Mr. Lazarev (Belarus) said that Azerbaijan,
Armenia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Greece, Hungary, Italy,
Kazakhstan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Luxembourg, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine and Venezuela had joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution.
14. The draft resolution, in conjunction with
resolution 64/293, entitled “Global plan of action to
combat trafficking in persons”, was aimed at
convening a high-level meeting of the General
Assembly in order to take stock of the progress made
in implementing the plan of action to eliminate
trafficking in persons, as well as to assess what further
measures would be required. A meeting on such a level
and scale on the issue of human trafficking would be a
first for the United Nations.
15. Since its adoption in 2010, the Plan of Action had
become a widely accepted term of reference within the
United Nations system as well as a practical document
guiding the actions of Governments, international
organizations and non-governmental entities as well.
That fact testified to its effectiveness both as a means
to combat trafficking and as an instrument to provide
real assistance to its victims.
16. Beginning in 2005, his country had repeatedly
raised at the United Nations the issue of human
trafficking and the need for a global partnership to
combat it, but a great deal of work remained before all
those responsible were prosecuted and punished, and
all those affected were afforded relief. It would
therefore continue to wage an uncompromising
campaign against a form of modern-day slavery which
should have no place in the civilized world.
17. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Bosnia and Herzegovina, Côte d’Ivoire, Eritrea,
Estonia, Iceland, Ireland, Liberia, Mexico,
Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian
Federation, Serbia, Slovenia, Swaziland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Uganda had
joined the sponsors.
18. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.16/Rev.1 was adopted.
19. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that her
delegation remained committed to combating
trafficking in persons. International attention should be
focused on the implementation of the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. The Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Persons was expected to help that
implementation. Although some States had made
progress in adopting anti-trafficking legislation, the
number of prosecutions was disappointing compared to
the magnitude of the problem. The enforcement of laws
and the protection of victims were important in the
fight against human trafficking.
20. Her delegation was concerned that the additional
financial requirements of the draft resolution would be
difficult to absorb within the existing budget without
straining the resources of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC). Her delegation had
therefore joined the consensus in the expectation that
every effort would be made to absorb the additional
costs.
21. Ms. Taracena Secaira (Guatemala) and
Ms. Wilson (Jamaica) said that their delegations would
have wished to join the sponsors of the draft resolution.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.