United Nations A/C.3/62/L.83
GeneralAssembly Distr.: Limited
13 November 2007
Original: English
07-59619 (E) 141107
*0759619*
Sixty-second session
Third Committee
Agenda items 128 and 70 (c)
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009
Promotion and protection of human rights: human
rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs
and representatives
Situation of human rights in Myanmar
Programme budget implications of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.41
Statement submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
I. Requests contained in the draft resolution
1. Under the terms of paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.41, the General
Assembly would request the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to provide his good offices and to pursue his discussions on
the situation of human rights and the restoration of democracy with the Government
and the people of Myanmar, including all relevant parties to the national
reconciliation process in Myanmar, and to offer technical assistance to the
Government in this regard;
(b) To closely monitor the developments with regard to the violent incidents
that took place with the aim of preventing the resumption of violence;
(c) To give all necessary assistance to enable the Special Adviser and the
Special Rapporteur to discharge their mandates fully and effectively and in a
coordinated manner;
(d) To report to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session on the
progress made in the implementation of the present resolution.A/C.3/62/L.83
07-59619 2
II. Relationship of the proposed requests to the biennial programme
plan and priorities for the period 2008-2009
2. The foregoing requests relate to subprogramme 1, Prevention, control and
resolution of conflicts, of programme 2, Political affairs, and subprogramme 3,
Advisory services, technical cooperation and field activities, and subprogramme 4,
Support for human rights thematic fact-finding procedures, of programme 19,
Human rights, of the biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2008-
2009.1
III. Activities by which the requests would be implemented
3. In his report to the General Assembly (A/62/498), the Secretary-General
indicated that further efforts had been made to engage the Myanmar authorities, as
well as key interested Member States, in support of his good offices mission. Those
efforts were intensified in response to the crisis that broke out in Myanmar on
19 August 2007. The Secretary-General issued statements expressing his concern at
the escalation of tensions on the ground and reports of continued human rights
violations. He called upon the Government of Myanmar to heed the concerns and
requests of the international community for maximum restraint and dialogue, and to
ensure immediate access to all detainees.
4. The Secretary-General strongly believes that there should be opportunities in
the period ahead to improve the outcome of the National Convention in ways that
are more inclusive, participatory and transparent. He also believes that the
Government of Myanmar should seize the opportunity to take bold actions towards
democratization and respect for human rights. The Secretary-General welcomed the
possibility of a meeting between Senior General Than Shwe and Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi, and urged both parties to display maximum flexibility and engage in
meaningful dialogue. In addition, he has urged the Government to be more
responsive to the extremely fragile humanitarian and socio-economic conditions
prevailing in the country. The Secretary-General believes that any serious steps on
the political front should be acknowledged by the international community through
the provision of incentives in the socio-economic area.
5. The Secretary-General is thus committed to making every effort to steer
Myanmar towards national reconciliation, the transition to democracy and full
respect for human rights as the necessary foundations for long-term stability and
prosperity. He welcomes the constructive role played by Myanmar’s neighbours and
by the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and encourages such
efforts to continue.
6. Consistent with the requests contained in paragraph 6 of draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.41, the efforts of the good offices of the Secretary-General would be
continued in 2008, in pursuit of his discussions on the situation of human rights and
the restoration of democracy with the Government and the people of Myanmar, as
well as all relevant parties to the national reconciliation process. The efforts of his
good offices would be carried out through his Special Envoy and the progress made
__________________
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/61/6/Rev.1).A/C.3/62/L.83
3 07-59619
in the implementation of the resolution would be reported to the General Assembly
at its sixty-third session.
IV. Estimated resource requirements
7. The estimated costs of continuing the efforts of the good offices of the
Secretary-General to facilitate the process of national reconciliation and
democratization through his Special Envoy for Myanmar, as requested in paragraph
6 (a), (b), (c) and (d) of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.41, for a one-year period, from
1 January to 31 December 2008, amount to $781,900 net ($865,100 gross).
8. These resources would cover the salaries for the Special Envoy, including two
support staff (1 P-4 and 1 General Service (Other level)); the official travel of the
Special Envoy to Myanmar, neighbouring countries in the region, Europe and North
America, including United Nations Headquarters; the services of a consultant; and
miscellaneous services in support of his mission. Other substantive and
administrative support to the Special Envoy would be provided by the Department
of Political Affairs.
9. With regard to the request contained in the last part of paragraph 6 (a),
concerning technical assistance, such assistance, if requested, would be
accommodated within the technical cooperation activities of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. As to the request contained in
paragraph 6 (c), pertaining to the Special Rapporteur, the Secretary-General in his
statement of programme budget implications informed the Human Rights Council,
upon adoption of its resolution S-5/1, that the estimated requirements of $46,700
required to implement activities called for in the resolution would be absorbed
within the appropriations approved for the biennium 2006-2007. The Secretary-
General would also inform the General Assembly on the estimated requirements, in
his report on the revised estimates resulting from resolution S-5/1. The requirements
fall under section 23, Human rights, of the programme budget for the biennium
2006-2007.
10. With regard to the biennium 2008-2009, no additional resources are requested
for section 23, Human rights, at this juncture in the light of the continuing review by
the Human Rights Council of its subsidiary machinery in response to General
Assembly resolution 60/251. Should additional resources be required, a consolidated
statement of requirements arising from the continuing review by the Human Rights
Council and potential absorptive capacity from reduced requirements arising from
the amended programme of work under the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2008-2009 would be reported to the General Assembly.
V. Summary
11. Should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.41,
additional requirements amounting to $781,900 net ($865,100 gross) would be
required for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2008, under section 3,
Political affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008-
2009, for the continuation of the efforts of the good offices of the Secretary-
General relating to the situation in Myanmar. Appropriation for these
requirements will be sought in the context of the report of the Secretary-A/C.3/62/L.83
07-59619 4
General on estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and
other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the
Security Council: thematic cluster I. Special and personal envoys, special
advisers and personal representatives of the Secretary-General and the Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon (A/62/512/Add.1) being
submitted to the Assembly during its current session.