United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.24
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
2 February 2010
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-57418 (E)
*0957418*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 24th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 22 October 2009, at 10 a.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/64/SR.24
09-57418 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/64/81)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/64/159, A/64/160,
A/64/170, A/64/171, A/64/175, A/64/181,
A/64/186, A/64/187, A/64/188, A/64/209,
A/64/211, A/64/211/Corr.1, A/64/213,
A/64/213/Corr.1, A/64/214, A/64/216, A/64/219,
A/64/226, A/64/255, A/64/256, A/64/265,
A/64/272, A/64/273, A/64/279, A/64/289,
A/64/290, A/64/293, A/64/304, A/64/320 and
A/64/333)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/64/224, A/64/318, A/64/319, A/64/328,
A/64/334 and A/64/357)
1. Mr. Ojea Quintana (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar), introducing his
report (A/64/318), said that national elections, the fifth
step of the seven-step road map to democracy in
Myanmar, were planned for 2010. However, the
Government had not yet promulgated any electoral law
or announced an official date for the elections, which
cast some doubt on its commitment to international
human rights standards and democratic values.
2. National elections should be inclusive, so all
prisoners of conscience should be released and enabled
to participate, either as candidates or as voters.
Elections should also be fair and transparent, and the
candidates should be able to campaign without
harassment. They should have full liberty to exercise
their rights of freedom of speech, movement and
association. Voters should be allowed to exercise their
freedom of expression without fear of intimidation or
reprisals. All the political factions should be free to
attend the counting of ballots, alongside the civil
servants in charge of the counting.
3. Participation by the international community in
the electoral process could only strengthen the
credibility of the end result. He therefore proposed the
establishment of an oversight mechanism, similar to
the tripartite partnership between Myanmar, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
the United Nations which had been found so effective
in responding to humanitarian needs after Cyclone
Nargis. The mechanism would oversee the
inclusiveness, transparency and fairness of the
elections.
4. He had recommended that the Government of
Myanmar should implement four core human rights
elements: revision of domestic laws to ensure
compliance with international human rights standards
and the human rights provisions in the new
Constitution; release of all prisoners of conscience;
reform of the armed forces; and the independence of
the judiciary. Human rights violations were widespread
and systematic, resulting in serious abuses in many
conflict areas, and the prevailing impunity allowed the
violations to continue. He was again asking the
Government of Myanmar to take urgent steps to
ascertain who was responsible, to prosecute the
perpetrators and to sensitize its armed forces to the
provisions of international law on human rights and
international humanitarian law.
5. Impunity was proof that the judiciary was not
independent and that its members were not sufficiently
aware of their duty. He therefore suggested that
Myanmar should request technical assistance and
advice on reforming its judiciary. One of the pillars of
democracy being the independence of the three State
organs from each other, the seven-step road map would
not be completed until members of the judiciary were
aware of their rights and responsibility to ensure
justice, including by combating impunity through fair
and transparent trials. The country’s laws must be
revised to bring them into conformity with
international human rights law.
6. In Myanmar, a rice-exporting country, 5 million
people were in need of food aid. Many people had no
access to health care or proper housing and were
unable to meet their essential needs unless their
children worked, and as a result the children were
unable to go to school. A solution must be found to that
situation.
7. He mentioned the trial of Aung San Suu Kyi and
pointed out that although 131 prisoners of conscience
had been released in September, over 2,000 others were
still in prison. The Government must refrain from
imprisoning its political opponents, and must release
all prisoners of conscience before the elections in
2010.A/C.3/64/SR.24
3 09-57418
8. He welcomed the decision of the Government of
Myanmar to accept a third mission to the country
before the end of 2009, and reiterated his commitment
to helping the country to promote human rights.
9. Mr. Tun (Myanmar) said that he was happy to
confirm that the Myanmar authorities were expecting a
third visit from the Special Rapporteur. He regretted,
however, that the Special Rapporteur had not shown
sufficient recognition of the spirit of cooperation
shown by the Government of Myanmar, given that
during his visit he had held meetings with ministers,
visited prisons, travelled to the region affected by
Cyclone Nargis, and in Kayin State had met national
groups which had returned to the legal fold. In the
report, the views of the insurgents and
anti-Government groups had been given a sympathetic
ear. The report contained unverified allegations and its
focus was on selected individuals and groups, rather
than engagement with the authorities.
10. It was also regrettable that the Special Rapporteur
was expressing doubt that the elections scheduled for
2010 would actually take place, and was questioning
the determination of the Government of Myanmar to
hold free and fair elections, promulgate electoral laws
in the near future and also establish an electoral
commission.
11. In spite of the Special Rapporteur’s doubts as to
the independence and impartiality of the judicial
system, the basic principles of the judicial process
were part of the law. In his country, the courts were not
dependent on either the executive or the legislature.
Fundamental rights were protected by a constitutional
court. The appointment of the President and members
of the Supreme Court had to be authorized by the
National Assembly, and the Supreme Court acted to
protect human rights. In questioning the manner in
which judges performed their role, the Special
Rapporteur was exceeding his mandate. Cooperation
must to be the basis for protecting human rights.
12. Ms. Mirow (Sweden), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, said that a forthcoming draft
resolution would reflect concern about the human
rights situation in Myanmar, and would focus on
human rights and the 2010 elections. She asked how
the Government of Myanmar could make progress in
applying the four elements defined by the Special
Rapporteur before elections were held, and what
assistance it could expect in that regard from United
Nations agencies. She wondered how the future
ASEAN Inter-Governmental Commission on Human
Rights could help Myanmar to become a genuine
democracy, and would like to know more about the
technical assistance which the country needed,
according to the Special Rapporteur, in order to
improve the situation of prisoners of conscience and
reform its judicial system.
13. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) asked if Myanmar
would demonstrate, through specific actions, its
intention to cooperate and improve the humanitarian
and human rights situation by following up the
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur and
guaranteeing him regular access to the country. He
welcomed the recent release of a number of prisoners,
and asked that all political prisoners should be released
and that the house arrest order on Aung San Suu Kyi
lifted before the 2010 elections. He called upon
Myanmar to hold free and transparent elections
meeting international standards, to enter into dialogue
with all the political factions, and to guarantee the
rights of minorities. He asked how the international
community could support the Government of Myanmar
in that process.
14. Ms. Ellis (Australia) deplored the continuing
house arrest order against Aung San Suu Kyi. The 131
recently released prisoners must be enabled to play a
part in politics, and all political prisoners should be set
free. The continuing conflict and the recruitment of
child soldiers by the various parties was to be
condemned. It was regrettable that the Special
Rapporteur had not been able to make a further visit to
Myanmar since February, and that Myanmar had not
presented any progress report. She asked what the
Special Rapporteur would treat as a priority when he
made his third visit in November 2009.
15. Ms. Kopicova (Czech Republic) said that the end
of 2009 was fast approaching, and she wondered
whether Myanmar would have time to promulgate
electoral laws and release prisoners of conscience
before the 2010 elections were held. She also wished to
know what other measures had been taken by the
Government of Myanmar since the most recent visit of
the Special Rapporteur.
16. Mr. Mohamed (Maldives) supported the call for
the unconditional release of Aung San Suu Kyi and
recalled that his country had co-sponsored the last
Human Rights Council resolution on the release ofA/C.3/64/SR.24
09-57418 4
political prisoners. He reminded Myanmar that it had
given a commitment to organize free and fair elections
in 2010.
17. Ms. Freedman (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland) said that her country remained
deeply concerned at the systematic and widespread
violations, the arbitrary arrests and the continued
detention of numerous political prisoners, and in
particular the house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi. She
called for all political detainees to be released and for
all political and ethnic groups to be enabled to take
part in the democratic process. She requested the
Special Rapporteur to supply details on the conditions
of detention of the political prisoners, on the
inter-ethnic conflicts at the borders of the country,
which had created flows of refugees, on the
discrimination with regard to the Muslim population in
Northern Rakhine State and on the closures of Catholic
churches in Shan State. She also asked about the likely
impact on human rights of the elections planned for
2010.
18. Mr. Tun (Myanmar), speaking on a point of
order, said that his country should be called by its
correct name, Myanmar, not Burma.
19. Mr. Okuda (Japan) welcomed the release of
131 political prisoners in September but deplored the
continued house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi. Japan
urged the Government to release all political prisoners
and to establish a process of democratization before the
2010 elections, pointing out that time was becoming
short. It also urged Myanmar to organize inclusive, fair
and transparent elections. He asked what the Special
Rapporteur’s priorities would be for his third visit and
how the countries of Asia could assist Myanmar to
become a democracy .
20. Ms. Plaisted (United States of America) said that
she regretted that the Special Rapporteur had not been
permitted to make a follow-up visit to Burma before
issuing his report. She asked the Special Rapporteur
whether it was time to change strategy, as his report
suggested might be necessary, in the light of the lack of
progress with regard to human rights on the part of the
Burmese authorities. Her delegation called for the
release of all prisoners of conscience, one of the four
core elements that the Special Rapporteur had
recommended taking into account; she asked whether
the Burmese authorities had made a commitment to
free any more of them. The United States was deeply
troubled by the use of rape and sexual assault by the
army and wished to know whether such crimes would
be investigated. She fully supported the call made by
the Special Rapporteur for assistance to the civilian
victims of conflict, in particular the ethnic minorities
who were the subject of ongoing attacks and the
Muslims living in the north of the country. The
international community must remain vigilant; it was
important to take into account the recommendations of
the Special Rapporteur in that area.
21. The Chairperson reminded all delegations that
they should use the official designation of Myanmar.
22. Mr. Tun (Myanmar), speaking on a point of
order, reminded the representative of the United States
of America, and at the same time all other delegations,
that his country had changed its name and that it
should therefore be referred to by its official
designation.
23. Ms. Melon (Argentina) expressed the hope that
the forthcoming visit of the Special Rapporteur to
Myanmar would coincide with the release of other
political prisoners and the reform of the justice sector.
She wished to learn about the objectives and priorities
of that next visit, and also how the international
community could contribute to the implementation of
the four core elements which the Special Rapporteur
had recommended.
24. Ms. Sunderland (Canada), observing that the
2010 elections were drawing close, that no date had
been set for them, that numerous political prisoners
were still in detention, and that no laws pertaining to
participation in the election had been promulgated,
asked how the Special Rapporteur intended to ensure
that all legitimate political actors in Myanmar would
be able to participate fully in the forthcoming
elections. Canada was deeply disappointed at the
refusal of the Government of Myanmar to permit the
Secretary-General to make a visit to Aung San Suu Kyi
but did recognize that she had recently been allowed to
meet Western diplomats. She asked whether that
measure could be considered to be a sign of
willingness on the part of the authorities of Myanmar
to engage with the international community, and, if so,
what next steps the Special Rapporteur would
recommend.
25. With regard to the ethnic minorities, and given
the intensification of military activity in ethnic areas,
she asked whether the Special Rapporteur had noted anA/C.3/64/SR.24
5 09-57418
increase in human rights abuses, in particular with
regard to the use of child soldiers and forced labour.
26. Ms. Taylor (New Zealand) called for the
immediate and unconditional release of all political
prisoners. She asked the Special Rapporteur to give
more detail on the situation of women and on ways to
empower them, including as part of the electoral
process.
27. Mr. Ojea Quintana (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar) was pleased
that the authorities of Myanmar had communicated
their willingness to continue to cooperate with him and
considered it highly valuable that he was to be allowed
to visit the country a third time and thus to have an
opportunity to be in direct contact with the population
and the victims, to assess for himself the human rights
situation in the country and to establish a dialogue with
the various relevant authorities. He wished to reaffirm
his independence and impartiality in his capacity as
Rapporteur.
28. With regard to the four core elements to be
implemented before the 2010 elections, the authorities
of Myanmar had confirmed that they were undertaking
a review of national legislation in order to verify that it
was in conformity with standards on human rights.
However, until they authorized the visit of the Special
Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers,
no evaluation of the legal system would be possible.
29. With regard to prisoners of conscience, it was
important that they should all be released before the
elections in 2010 so that they could participate fully
therein, if they so wished.
30. As for the armed forces, training courses on
human rights were planned. He recommended that, in
addition, there should be a total reorganization of the
armed forces to ensure that human rights were
respected throughout the country, in particular in the
areas of conflict.
31. With regard to the electoral process, freedom to
vote was a fundamental right, but there must also be
precise rules to ensure the participation of all the
parties concerned. He suggested that the tripartite
partnership should be re-established to observe the
elections. Additionally, he called on the international
community to be creative in proposing other ideas.
32. Unfortunately, he was unable to give more
information on the November 2009 visit to Myanmar;
the details of the visit were still under negotiation with
the country’s authorities.
33. The Government of Myanmar had demonstrated a
degree of goodwill and the international community
should seize the opportunity of the current historic
moment to take action, since the question of human
rights was not a matter for countries alone. He
reminded the Government of Myanmar that it had a
duty to respect the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, two
fundamental human rights instruments governing
international relations.
34. Mr. Muntarbhorn (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea) introducing his report (A/64/224)
covering the period from late 2008 to mid-2009, said
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK) had declined to cooperate with him. Recalling
the few positive elements that stood in contrast to the
alarming human rights situation in the DPRK — the
fact that the country was a party to four human rights
treaties and that it had undertaken certain law reforms
in recent years — he indicated that his analysis was
centred around five themes: freedom from want,
freedom from fear, freedom from discrimination,
freedom from persecution, and freedom from
exploitation.
35. The food shortages experienced by the DPRK
since the mid-1990s had reached alarming proportions
in 2009. As a result of the drop in food aid from the
international community, in response to the nuclear and
missile tests carried out by the DPRK, the World Food
Programme had recently been able to feed only a third
of those needing help. Furthermore, by prohibiting a
number of commercial activities and re-establishing
the system of distribution of rations, the authorities had
also contributed to an aggravation of the food situation.
36. The authorities practised extensive surveillance
over the country’s inhabitants, encouraging them to
inform on one another. In addition they had recourse to
collective punishment, public executions and torture.
Further, the authorities of the DPRK had been involved
in the abduction of a number of foreign nationals,
notably from Japan and from the Republic of Korea. In
addition, key issues remained to be settled dating from
the Korean War of 1950-1953, including matters of
prisoners of war, family reunification and missing
persons.A/C.3/64/SR.24
09-57418 6
37. The very hierarchical system in the country was
at the basis of the discrimination suffered by certain
population groups, including women and children. In
that connection, 2009 had been a key year, in which the
DPRK had submitted to the Committee on the Rights
of the Child its report on the implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, which had,
however, proved to be particularly thin in terms of
special protection measures for children in various
difficulties.
38. Forced displacements of the population, a
consequence of repression and persecution, but also,
for about the past 15 years, of the food crisis, was a
problem. Those migrants were exposed on all sides to
violations of their fundamental rights: in the
destination countries, which did not treat them as
refugees and refused them asylum, and in the DPRK
where the sanctions imposed on them had become
more severe. In addition, asylum seekers fell prey to
smugglers and traffickers in persons and their families
who had remained in the country were the target of
sanctions as a collective deterrent measure.
39. The people were being exploited by the ruling
class, which ensured the survival of the regime. The
country did have resources, but they were used
primarily for militarization rather than being used to
improve the welfare of the population within the
context of a people-first policy.
40. In conclusion, he reiterated the short- and long-
term recommendations which he had made to the
DPRK, in particular the need to put an end to
discriminatory measures, to impunity, to public
executions and to punishment of persons who had been
sent back to the country after seeking asylum abroad;
to ensure that the population could satisfy its basic
needs; to cooperate effectively to resolve the problem
of abductions of foreigners; to refocus public policies
on the interests of the people; to modernize the existing
system and to become a party to the major human
rights treaties; to guarantee the security of persons and
freedoms by eliminating the system of constant
surveillance and informing, reforming the justice
system and respecting international law; to participate
actively in the forthcoming universal periodic review
and to that end to request technical assistance from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; and to cooperate with the United
Nations human rights mechanisms, in particular the
Special Rapporteurs, in order to allow them to
ascertain that their recommendations were being
implemented and to enter the country.
41. He called on the international community to
tackle all the aspects of the country’s human rights
record more comprehensively, through the totality of
the United Nations system, and to use the DPRK’s
non-cooperation with his mandate as a key indicator
for the universal periodic review which was planned
for the end of the year.
42. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that his delegation had never recognized
the resolution which had created the Special Rapporteur’s
mandate (E/CN.4/RES/2004/13) and that it categorically
rejected his report (A/64/224) which it considered to be a
document full of lies and devised by hostile forces. Up to
2003, when the Human Rights Commission resolution on
the DPRK (E/CN.4/RES/2003/10) had been adopted by a
group of Western countries, his country had participated
in a range of cooperation activities in the field of human
rights. The delegation demanded that the DPRK must be
given equal treatment with other countries. Only if that
principle were observed would the country continue to
participate in the activities of the United Nations human
rights bodies. It would refuse to submit to pressure from
any country that would attempt to single it out for
political reasons.
43. Ms. Mirow (Sweden), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, asked how the Special Rapporteur
would implement an integrated approach to ensure the
protection of human rights in the DPRK and which
areas should be given priority. She wondered whether
there were any signs of engagement on the part of the
Government to participate in the defence of human
rights, which the international community could
encourage and support, and, in the context of the
universal periodic review, which the DPRK was ready
to undergo, whether he could see any way to encourage
the country to request technical assistance from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. She also asked whether there was any
reason to think that the country’s leadership was on the
point of renouncing its military-first policy in order to
favour the interests of the people, and what measures
the Government should take to tackle the root causes of
displacements, and what role the international
community, in particular the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and
neighbouring countries, could play in guaranteeing
observance of the principle of non-refoulement.A/C.3/64/SR.24
7 09-57418
44. Ms. Ellis (Australia) said that her country was
continuing to supply humanitarian assistance for the
people of the DPRK through multilateral channels,
without linkage to political considerations. Recalling
that the Special Rapporteur had recommended that the
international community should maximize dialogue
with the Government of the DPRK to enlarge the space
for human rights discourse and action, she asked him
whether he had any ideas on specific actions in that
regard.
45. Mr. Okuda (Japan) said that his country and the
DPRK had held working consultations in August 2008
during which they had agreed on the purpose and
procedures of the comprehensive investigation to be
undertaken by the DPRK into cases of abduction. In
November 2008, before the Third Committee, the
DPRK had declared itself determined to conduct that
investigation, but no action had been taken. In
September 2009, at the meeting of the Human Rights
Council in Geneva, it had claimed that the matter had
been resolved, whereas in fact no progress had been
made at all. Given that the mechanisms of the United
Nations system were ready to assist the DPRK to
improve its human rights situation, he asked what
contribution the Special Rapporteur considered he
could make if he was permitted to enter the country.
46. Mr. Long (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland) said that even if the DPRK had
shown evidence of some progress in certain specific
areas, for example the measures provided for people
with disabilities, until it engaged with United Nations
human rights mechanisms and allowed the Special
Rapporteur access to the country, it would be difficult
to verify information. He asked whether the Special
Rapporteur had received any information, and, if so,
what credence he attached to it and whether it indicated
an improvement or deterioration in the situation. With
regard to the human rights violations suffered by
migrants returning to DPRK, he wished to know
whether the Special Rapporteur had been able, since
2008, to engage with receiving States or with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on that issue, to urge that DPRK emigrants
who qualified for refugee status be treated in
accordance with international law and the principle of
non-refoulement applied. He asked what measures the
DPRK should take as a matter of priority to reform its
justice system and guarantee personal security and
freedoms and how the international community could
support such reforms.
47. Ms. Plaisted (United States of America) asked
whether there were any signs that the authorities of the
DPRK planned to modify the policies which had led to
the food shortages in the country. She also asked for
his views on the North Korean refugee situation and
the content of any discussions held with countries of
first asylum about the plight of those refugees. Human
rights constituted a top priority for the United States,
and addressing such issues would have a significant
impact on the prospects for closer ties between the two
countries.
48. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) speaking on a point of order, requested that
the representative of the United States should use the
official name of his country.
49. Ms. Chun Hay-Ran (Republic of Korea) stated
that her Government hoped that the reunification of
families separated by the frontier during the Korean
War would be regularized and expanded. Recalling
some recent positive developments in the DPRK,
referred to by the Special Rapporteur, she asked for his
appraisal of the impact of such developments on the
improvement of the human rights situation in the
country. She also asked whether the Special Rapporteur
had any suggestions for effective ways to ensure that
the universal periodic review planned for December
2009 would help to bring about substantial
improvement in the quality of everyday life of the
population.
50. Mr. Michelsen (Norway) called on the DPRK to
permit the Special Rapporteur to enter the country. He
urged him to continue to highlight the forced
repatriation of North Korean nationals seeking asylum
in neighbouring countries, because that practice was
contrary to the international principle of
non-refoulement. Norway shared the Special
Rapporteur’s view that the serious humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
hampered the fulfilment of human rights and
commended the Secretary-General for calling on the
Government of the DPRK to address the critical
humanitarian needs of the country’s population. His
country was looking forward to the universal periodic
review the following December which would cover
both Norway and the DPRK.A/C.3/64/SR.24
09-57418 8
51. Ms. Sunderland (Canada) said that her
delegation was troubled by reports of the decline of
food availability and the related increase in child
malnutrition and illness, and deplored the economic
measures that had contributed to the situation. She
asked the Special Rapporteur whether he had recently
observed any improvement in food security in the
DPRK and what course of action he recommended to
the international community in order to maximize
dialogue with the Government, as recommended in his
report.
52. Mr. Muntarbhorn (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea), replying to the representative of
the DPRK, said that he had attempted throughout the
six years that his mandate had been in existence to
carry out his work in an independent and objective
manner and he had always invited the DPRK to
examine his draft reports and to comment on them. He
deplored the lack of cooperation and the gravity of the
human rights situation in the country, and remarked
that it would be in the interests of the DPRK to
promote respect for such rights.
53. He recalled that in his earlier report to the Human
Rights Council he had envisaged the adoption of an
integrated approach incorporating preventive strategies
based on participation by the people and allied with
protective measures and with the provision of
assistance. However, such measures needed to be
accompanied by greater liberalization, an improvement
in food security and movement towards a people-first
policy. The DPRK was a party to four international
human rights treaties, and he urged it to implement the
recommendations drawn up by the corresponding treaty
bodies, which echoed the recommendations made by
the United Nations system as a whole, and suggested
that it should regard the universal periodic review as a
further opportunity for effective promotion of a culture
of protection of human rights. The DPRK had not
requested any technical assistance from the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, presumably because it rejected the resolutions
that had been adopted concerning its human rights
situation. He urged the authorities of the DPRK to
promote a policy of equitable development, based on a
culture of respect for human rights. With regard to
displacement of people, the Government must put an
end to persecutions and to mandatory exit visas and
must stop punishing those who left the country without
a visa or came back to it.
54. Responding to the question from the Australian
delegation, he said that the United Nations system had
means to exert pressure on the DPRK; for example, the
Security Council had adopted resolutions to impose
sanctions on it because of the nuclear issue. He
concurred with the resolution that provision of
humanitarian aid should not be affected.
55. Turning to the question of the Japanese
delegation, he said that he would support the need for
expeditious resolution of the abductions issue and
remarked in that regard that the Pyongyang Declaration
constituted a first step towards gradual normalization
of relations between the two countries. If he was
permitted to enter the DPRK, he would make efforts to
promote concrete developments in terms of human
rights implementation.
56. As to knowing whether improvements had been
observed, of course it was encouraging that laws or
amendments had been adopted, but the real question
was the extent to which the international human rights
standards were implemented. In addition, he
recommended juvenile justice reform as the entry point
for reform of the justice system as a whole. There was
a need to promote the independence of the judiciary
and to constrain the powers of the local administrations
which acted without due process of law.
57. With regard to the food situation, he indicated
that a production campaign had been launched but that
it could not bear fruit because of a lack of fertilizer and
because it was a forced initiative imposed by the army.
There was still a need to enhance food security,
however, based on people’s participation and benefit-
sharing. The World Food Programme should be
enabled to provide assistance to some 6 million people,
since at least a third of the population was suffering
hunger. The report on the national census which was
about to be published would give a more precise
picture of the situation.
58. He expressed the wish to begin a dialogue with a
view to promoting protection and humane treatment of
all refugees and migrants, on the basis of respect for
the principle of non-refoulement, and of the
reunification of families, giving particular attention to
war victims and to the handicapped, as well as to
respect for the privacy of members of reunited
families. He also regularly consulted the Office of theA/C.3/64/SR.24
9 09-57418
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) with regard to asylum-seekers, and would
intervene directly with the DPRK if he was informed
of cases of refoulement. He urged the DPRK to
participate fully in the universal periodic review
process and to submit reports to the various agencies of
the United Nations system and took the view that, in
contradiction to the position expressed by the DPRK in
its report, human rights were not a matter of national
sovereignty but were universal in nature. The DPRK
was not a poor country and national resources should
be expended on the development of the population.
Finally, he pointed out that he was ready to enter into
dialogue on the various questions with the other human
rights bodies and recommended the adoption of a
global approach by the United Nations system as a
whole.
59. Mr. Falk (Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967), presenting his report (A/64/328), deplored
the lack of cooperation by Israel, which continued to
deny him access to the occupied Palestinian territories
and to refuse to cooperate with the fact-finding mission
led by Judge Goldstone. In consequence, the report
relied on information supplied by various independent
organizations and actors within the United Nations
system. The General Assembly or the Human Rights
Council should request clarification of the legal
consequences of that lack of cooperation, by referring
the issue to the International Court of Justice for an
advisory opinion.
60. The Goldstone report was of particular
importance from the point of view of protection of
human rights in occupied Gaza, and he challenged the
United Nations to implement fully-documented
findings on the commission of war crimes by Israel and
Hamas during Operation Cast Lead. His own report
contained proposals for measures to ensure
accountability through the Security Council, the
International Court of Justice, and through recourse to
universal jurisdiction, and thereby to put an end to the
Israel’s impunity with respect to the administration of
the occupied Palestinian territories. He suggested,
furthermore, that the General Assembly should ensure
that victims were compensated and should promote a
legal discussion on the weapons and tactics used in the
invasion of Gaza.
61. Although the ceasefire was more or less holding,
the situation in Gaza had continued to deteriorate in a
manner that disclosed grave breaches of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and violations of international
humanitarian law. The population lacked basic
necessities, health conditions had further worsened and
damaged buildings had not been repaired or rebuilt,
since the entry of building material was prohibited by
Israel. Several authoritative reports had also confirmed
the allegations of war crimes, culminating in the
Goldstone report. Civil society groups and certain
governments had protested against perceived violations
of international humanitarian law by Israel.
62. The fifth anniversary of the advisory opinion on
the construction of a security wall by Israel called
attention to several points: despite the opinion rendered
by the International Court of Justice, construction of
the wall was two thirds complete; Israel’s defiance of
the Court’s ruling was a violation of its obligations as a
Member of the United Nations and as a sovereign
State; the failure of the United Nations system to
implement the Court’s decision was another indication
that Palestinians’ rights were not respected and that
Israel enjoyed de facto impunity; and Israeli security
forces had brutally repressed non-violent Palestinian
demonstrations.
63. In addition, despite the calls for a settlement
freeze by the General Assembly, President Obama and
the Quartet, settlement expansion continued in East
Jerusalem and Gaza, although it had been made clear
that there would be no progress on the “road map”
under those conditions. It had been widely assumed
that the exercise of the Palestinians’ inalienable right to
self-determination would be brought about by bilateral
negotiations, with the participation of the United States
and the Quartet and the encouragement of the
international community. However, because the
exercise of that right had been so long deferred, finding
a peaceful solution and ending Israeli occupation had
become an urgent matter. Two negative elements
bearing on the right to self-determination were the
Israeli Government’s refusal to endorse the
international consensus on a Palestinian State
comprising the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and the inability on the
Palestinian side to achieve unified and legitimate
representation and therefore to engage in meaningful
negotiations.
64. On the other hand, the clear articulations that
ending Israeli occupation and establishing a Palestinian
State were important to advancing self-determinationA/C.3/64/SR.24
09-57418 10
and that Israeli-Arab peace and a Palestinian State were
in the interest of the international community were two
positive developments. Security Council resolution
1860 (2009) clearly called on the parties and the
international community to renew their efforts to
achieve a comprehensive peace based on two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace, with secure and recognized borders.
65. Israel’s occupation of Palestinian territories and
recent military operations had revealed three gaps in
international humanitarian law that deserved to be
noted. First, the civilian population in Gaza had been
denied the right to depart from the combat zone,
although it was the occupier’s duty to protect civilians,
as described in Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions. Second, blocking reconstruction aid
could be treated as prohibited collective punishment.
As international humanitarian law did not explicitly
address that problem, it could be handled by the
adoption of a further protocol to the Geneva
Conventions. Third, the dislocation of families as a
result of the prolonged occupation of the occupied
Palestinian Territory, coupled with the restrictions on
mobility imposed by the occupying power, was an
unacceptable practice from an international human
rights perspective.
66. Mr. Mansour (Observer for Palestine) thanked
the Special Rapporteur for his report and presentation.
He was pleased that those matters were being
addressed, as they were of great importance not only to
the Palestinian people, but also to all States that had
regard for the rule of law. He endorsed the resolution
recently adopted by the Human Rights Council, which
condemned Israel’s policy of obstruction. By
preventing those who had violated international law
from being held accountable for their actions, Israel
was perpetuating a culture of impunity. He called on
Member States to do everything possible to implement
the recommendations in the report and ensure justice
for the Palestinian people, who had endured such
terrible suffering as a result of Israel’s policy of
aggression, particularly in Gaza. He highlighted States’
responsibility to put an end to the impunity enjoyed by
Israel and to bring the criminals to justice.
67. Ms. Plaisted (United States of America) said that
since taking office, President Obama had been strongly
committed to comprehensive peace in the Middle East
and to the existence of two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side, in peace and security. The United
States of America remained fully dedicated to the
prompt resumption of meaningful negotiations in
pursuit of those goals. Her delegation had frequently
urged the United Nations to demonstrate balance and
objectivity and to work constructively on the situation
in Israel and the Palestinian territories and regretted
that the Special Rapporteur had focused only on
Israel’s violations of international law. She noted that
the Special Rapporteur’s report documented serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law in Gaza by Hamas as well as Israel. Her
delegation took those allegations very seriously, as the
United States was committed to the universal
application of international law, including
humanitarian law and human rights law, and expected
the same of the two parties. However, a moral
equivalence should not be drawn between Israel, a
democratic State with a right to self-defence, and
Hamas, a terrorist group that had responded to Israel’s
withdrawal from Gaza by terrorizing civilian
populations in southern Israel. Israel had the
institutions and necessary means to adequately
investigate the accusations levelled against it, and it
had been doing so. Her delegation encouraged Israel to
investigate all of the credible allegations of misconduct
and violations of international law and to punish those
responsible. Her Government also demanded that the
Palestinian Authority conduct its own investigations of
the violations of international law committed by
Hamas, a terrorist group which had taken Gaza from
the Palestinian Authority’s legitimate Government by
force and which could not and would not examine its
own violations. President Obama had made it clear that
he rejected the legitimacy of Israel’s settlement
expansion. Her delegation was troubled by the
recommendations and suggestions in the Special
Rapporteur’s report that the General Assembly or the
Human Rights Council request an advisory opinion
from the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of Israel’s non-cooperation with the
United Nations and its representatives. The statements
and conclusions on international law matters contained
in the report and its suggestion that the General
Assembly should establish an international criminal
tribunal did not contribute either to the principle of
accountability or to the protection of the human rights
of all parties to the conflict. Her delegation urged all
Member States of the United Nations to contribute to
the larger, essential goal of establishing just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.A/C.3/64/SR.24
11 09-57418
68. Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran)
thanked the Special Rapporteur for his comprehensive
and informative report on the serious human rights
violations in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Although the report covered some cases of systematic
human rights violations, including the continuing
blockade, the war crimes committed during “Operation
Cast Lead” and the establishment of illegal settlements,
many other violations committed by the occupying
power had not been mentioned. The report examined
the issue of the occupying Power’s accountability for
the atrocities committed against the Palestinian people
for over 60 years; Operation Cast Lead should not be
considered an isolated case. The recent Gaza War had
plunged 1.5 million people into a state of despair.
Excessive and indiscriminate use of force had killed
and wounded thousands of Palestinian civilians,
including women and children. The War had also
resulted in extrajudicial executions and the destruction
of homes, property, infrastructure and agricultural land.
His delegation was surprised that despite the broad
consensus reached regarding the various means of
redressing war crimes committed by an occupying
regime, the report did not include any
recommendations on employing a competent
mechanism to examine the accountability of the
perpetrators of those crimes.
69. Ms. Måwe (Sweden), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, said that the European Union was
gravely concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
and human rights situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. She urged the two parties to strictly observe
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
They had a responsibility to prevent, investigate and
remedy violations. The European Union regretted that
the Special Rapporteur had not been able to visit Israel
or the occupied Palestinian territories and called on all
States to cooperate and allow him free access to their
territory. She asked the Special Rapporteur what
practical measures the United Nations system could
take, in cooperation with the Israeli and Palestinian
parties, to improve the humanitarian and human rights
situation.
70. Ms. Gendi (Egypt), concurring with the
representative of Sweden, also asked what the United
Nations system could do to improve the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories and to contribute to the
full implementation of resolutions that had been
adopted but that, to date, existed only on paper. Her
delegation also wondered what the international
community could do to prevent any form of selectivity
when determining priorities for resolving diverse
conflicts.
71. Mr. Mohamed (Maldives) welcomed the
comprehensive scope of the Special Rapporteur’s
report. His delegation expressed regret that Israel, the
occupying Power, had refused to cooperate with the
Special Rapporteur in preparing the report. Given the
Maldives’ firm commitment to the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, his delegation
was shocked by the continued suffering of the
Palestinian people due to the denial of their most basic
rights: the right to self-determination and the right to
live in peace and security in their own State and
homeland. His delegation also supported the Israeli
people’s right to live in peace and security beside a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State. In the
interest of justice, accountability for the violations of
human rights law and humanitarian law in Gaza must
be pursued. He asked the Special Rapporteur to
provide details on the role international organizations
could play in ensuring respect for international law,
considering the gaps in international humanitarian law
that enabled the culture of impunity and the continued
suffering of people in the occupied Palestinian
territories. He also asked what the Special Rapporteur
was doing to address the situation of Palestinian
women and children, who were enduring challenges
and hardships that were particularly troublesome.
72. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) recognized the
Special Rapporteur’s courage at a time when human
rights issues were subject to double standards and
selectivity. His report, as well as the Goldstone report,
underscored the international community’s unwillingness
to make Israel respect its commitments and adhere to
international law. That was a worrisome situation, in that
it resulted in impunity, as the Special Rapporteur had
pointed out frankly. Some of the States that positioned
themselves as ardent defenders of human rights and
demanded that commitments be respected, for example
in the case of Myanmar or the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, showed a disregard for human rights
violations in the occupied territories. For that reason, her
delegation wished to reiterate its thanks to the Special
Rapporteur for his recommendations, and wondered if
those recommendations could be employed to find the
just and lasting solution to the question of Palestine that
the international community called for.A/C.3/64/SR.24
09-57418 12
73. Mr. Falk (Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967) said that it was important to note that the
three special rapporteurs who had made presentations
during the meeting faced the same problem of
non-cooperation from the countries under their human
rights mandate. The General Assembly and the United
Nations system had a responsibility to take that refusal
to cooperate very seriously and respond in a
non-discriminatory manner. The question should not be
one of politics, but rather of principles, and Israel
should face the same criticism and censure for its
non-cooperation as the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea or Myanmar. In the interest of peace and
human rights, such dialogue and unrestricted
investigations into human rights questions should be
facilitated. All of the special rapporteurs endeavoured
to carry out their role in the most objective and
impartial way possible, with concern for accuracy and
truth in their communication with Governments and
their representatives. He called attention to the opening
remarks by the Observer for Palestine, in which he had
implicitly been asking why, after 42 years of
occupation, nothing had been done to stop a Member
State from violating the rights, under international
humanitarian law, of an entire people. As the Observer
for Palestine had noted, it was a matter of both
bringing justice to the victims of violations and ending
the impunity of the State committing those violations.
74. In response to the remarks made by the
delegation of the United States, he said that while it
was all well and good to speak abstractly about a
commitment to peace, nothing concrete had been done
in the course of 42 years to bring the occupation in line
with international humanitarian law. In the context of
its very important role in the conflict, the Government
of the United States did not seek to fulfil the principle
of accountability; it was non-compliance with that
principle that had led to the hardship and suffering
endured by the Palestinian people. Requesting the
International Court of Justice to demand Member
States’ cooperation with representatives of the United
Nations was a constructive measure. He wondered how
his mandate, which required access to the occupied
territories, could be effective while Israel continued to
deny him entry.
75. He welcomed the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
interest in the long history of the occupation. Two
types of consistent violations by the occupier, which
entailed the Special Rapporteur’s responsibility, had
characterized the occupation: excessive use of force
and various forms of collective punishment. It was the
time for the international community to become
seriously engaged in the situation. He welcomed the
European Union’s call on all parties to cooperate with
representatives of the United Nations. In response to
the representatives of Sweden and Egypt, he said that
the first practical measure to implement at the current
stage would be to take the recommendations in the
Goldstone report seriously. Ignoring those
recommendations would be tantamount to declaring
that international criminal law was important only
when it coincided with the geopolitical priorities of
dominant countries. That was certainly not the message
to send if there was to be faith in the rule of law above
the rule of the strongest. That was a very significant
issue. The unprecedented prolonged occupation — an
occupation of 42 years — characterized by systematic
violations was a situation that deserved greater interest.
He wondered what threats such a situation posed to
international peace and security.
76. He thanked the representatives of the Syrian Arab
Republic and Maldives, in particular for highlighting
the lack of protection for women and children during
the Gaza operation, an exceptional situation in the
history of modern war. Not enough attention had been
paid, furthermore, to the trauma suffered by nearly 90
per cent of children in Gaza, who made up nearly 53
per cent of the population.
77. In conclusion, he emphasized the need to
implement concretely and take seriously the
recommendations in his report and the Goldstone
report and thus vindicate the role of the United
Nations.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.