United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.42
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
28 January 2008
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-59056 (E)
*0759056*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 42nd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 9 November 2007, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(f) Commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.42
07-59056 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to
self-determination (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.56)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.56: Universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination
1. Mr. Amil (Pakistan), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.56 on behalf of its sponsors, recalled that
the right to self-determination was enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the two International
Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and on Civil and Political Rights, and had been
reaffirmed at major conferences and United Nations
summits. International law accorded it great centrality
as the sine qua non for the enjoyment of all other
rights. It had enabled millions of people suppressed by
racist regimes, colonialism, apartheid, foreign
occupation and alien domination to achieve equality
before the law, in society and in politics.
2. He hoped that the draft resolution on the right to
self-determination would again be adopted by
consensus, as had traditionally been the case.
3. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Burkina Faso and Thailand wished to
join the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.31, L.39,
L.40, L.45, L.46, L.47, L.48, L.49, L.50, L.52,
L.53, L.54 and L.55)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.31: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
4. Mr. Attiya (Egypt), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.31 on behalf of its sponsors, said that
Azerbaijan and Mauritania wished to join the sponsors
and that the increasing number of sponsors
demonstrated the degree of importance attached to
examining the effects of globalization on humanity. It
was by no means an attempt either to prejudge the
course of globalization or to pass value judgements on
that phenomenon, but merely an attempt to grasp
changes in modes of communication, production and
technology in all their complexity, find a way of
optimizing the exercise of all human rights and help
the international community to better exploit
possibilities and face challenges that might arise.
5. He believed that it was possible to narrow and
even bridge the fault lines in perceptions of the human
rights aspects of globalization, and expressed the hope
that the international community would achieve greater
understanding of globalization and greater cooperation
in averting its negative effects.
6. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Afghanistan, Cape Verde, the Central
African Republic, Suriname and Tunisia wished to join
the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.40: Protection of migrants
7. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.40, said that Argentina, Armenia, Brazil,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ghana, Nicaragua,
Sri Lanka and Uruguay wished to join the sponsors. He
hoped that the draft would be adopted by consensus as
in previous years.
8. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Belize,
Benin, Cape Verde, Chile, Guinea, Haiti, Kyrgyzstan,
Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Paraguay and
Senegal wished to join the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.45: Human rights in the
administration of justice
9. Ms. Nguyen (Austria), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.45, said that Andorra,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Denmark, France, Japan, Jordan,
Mali, Switzerland, Ukraine and Uruguay wished to join
the sponsors. Out of its belief that an independent and
impartial judiciary and access to justice were
prerequisites for the rule of law and the protection of
human rights, her country had introduced draft
resolutions on that topic to the Third Committee and
the Commission on Human Rights every two years; the
last of those drafts had been adopted by consensus.
10. The draft resolution under consideration took into
account the fact that the question of human rights in
the administration of justice was under consideration in
the Human Rights Council. The text was thereforeA/C.3/62/SR.42
3 07-59056
mainly procedural. Its new elements were in the areas
of juvenile justice and women in prison.
11. A comprehensive debate was scheduled for 2008
on the report submitted by the Secretary-General to the
Human Rights Council at its fourth session in May
2007, on the basis of which the General Assembly
would revert to substantive consideration of that issue.
For the sake of avoiding duplications, her delegation
proposed that new reporting obligations of the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly should not
be created. She hoped that the draft would be adopted
without a vote.
12. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Benin, Cape Verde, Costa
Rica, El Salvador, Montenegro, Morocco, Paraguay,
the Republic of Korea, Serbia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia wished to join the sponsors of
the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.46: Effective promotion of
the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to
National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities
13. Ms. Schöfer (Austria), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.46, said that Australia, Belarus,
Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Greece, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Panama,
Romania, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Spain,
Ukraine and Uruguay wished to join the sponsors.
Meeting the aspirations of persons belonging to
minorities, which contributed to political and social
stability and peace and enriched the cultural diversity
and heritage of a society, could only be achieved
through the promotion of tolerance, mutual
understanding and pluralism.
14. Austria had traditionally introduced draft
resolutions on the rights of minorities to the Third
Committee, the Commission on Human Rights and,
more recently, the Human Rights Council.
15. The Human Rights Council was currently
considering the question of minorities and, in
particular, had adopted a resolution creating a Forum
on Minority Issues, which would replace the Working
Group on Minorities. At its annual session in 2008, it
would review the mandate of the independent expert on
minority issues. It was therefore proposed, in the short
procedural resolution under consideration, that the
General Assembly, taking into account those activities,
should resume substantive consideration of the
question of minorities at its sixty-third session. She
hoped that the draft would, as at the sixtieth session, be
adopted without a vote.
16. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Benin, Cape Verde, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, Guatemala, Mauritius,
Montenegro, the Republic of Korea, Serbia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia wished to join
the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.47: Protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism
17. Ms. Feller (Mexico), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.47, said that Monaco and Uruguay had
become sponsors. She reaffirmed that terrorism
represented a serious problem for the territorial
integrity and security of States but that the need for
States to protect their population, particularly from
terrorist acts, in no way justified suspension of the
rights of persons under their jurisdiction. In addition to
being reprehensible, measures that undermined human
rights were counterproductive because they detracted
from the goal, which was to ensure people’s safety.
18. The draft resolution reaffirmed the need for
counter-terrorism measures to be compatible with
international law and had been updated to take into
account persistent problems in that area. She hoped
that, following informal consultations being held, it
would be adopted by consensus.
19. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Angola, Armenia, Benin, Chile, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Morocco, Panama, Paraguay and Senegal had joined
the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.48: Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights
20. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to
introduce the draft resolution, expressed the hope that
the text, which encouraged international cooperation
and dialogue for the promotion, protection and full
realization of all human rights, would be adopted by
consensus.A/C.3/62/SR.42
07-59056 4
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.49: The right
to development
21. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to introduce
the draft resolution, said that the text was extremely
important to the Movement because its aim was to
ensure the implementation of the 1986 Declaration on
the Right to Development and of the Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted in 1993 and to support
the activities of the Human Rights Council and the
General Assembly. It was necessary to consider the
drafting of a convention or a legally binding instrument
on the right to development, which should be on par
with the other human rights and fundamental freedoms.
He expressed the hope that the text would be adopted
by consensus or at least with broad support.
22. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that China, El Salvador and the Philippines
had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.50: Human rights and
unilateral coercive measures
23. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to
introduce the draft resolution, noted with concern that,
despite the recommendations made in particular by the
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and its
predecessor the Commission on Human Rights,
unilateral coercive measures that were contrary to
international law and to the Charter and that had
serious socio-economic consequences in the
developing countries continued to be adopted and
applied, and urged all countries to refrain from using
them. He expressed the hope that the draft resolution
would be approved by the majority of countries.
24. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that China had become a sponsor of the
draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.52: Promotion of peace as
a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of all human
rights by all
25. Ms. González Navarro (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution, said that Bangladesh, Indonesia,
Kenya, the Russian Federation, Tunisia and
Turkmenistan had become sponsors. She hoped that the
draft resolution, which emphasized that all peoples had
a sacred right to peace and that the preservation and
promotion of peace constituted a fundamental
obligation of each State, would receive the support of
all Member States.
26. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Central African Republic had
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.53: The right to food
27. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of its sponsors, which had been
joined by: Azerbaijan, the Bahamas, Botswana, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Qatar, the Russian Federation,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, the Sudan and Zambia. She
said that the right to food was widely recognized in the
international instruments and declarations on human
rights but that hunger and food insecurity remained a
worldwide problem, which was particularly acute in
the developing countries and especially in Africa,
where the situation was deteriorating.
28. Hunger was an affront to human dignity, which
States must combat by adopting without delay political,
economic and social measures at the national, regional
and international levels and particularly by making use
of all available technical and financial resources. The
Secretary-General and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights should continue to provide the Special
Rapporteur on the right to food with the necessary
human and financial resources for the fulfilment of his
mandate and Governments, relevant United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, treaty bodies and
non-governmental organizations should cooperate with
the Rapporteur. Member States which had not yet done
so should become sponsors of the draft resolution in
order to reaffirm their commitment to the right of
everyone to healthy and sufficient food.
29. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Cameroon, Cape Verde, the Central
African Republic, Chad, China, the Comoros, the
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Djibouti, the Gambia,
Haiti, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Namibia, Norway, Oman, the Philippines,
Suriname, Turkey, Turkmenistan and the United
Republic of Tanzania had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution.A/C.3/62/SR.42
5 07-59056
30. He also announced that Cuba should of course be
added to the list of sponsors of draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.53.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.54: Strengthening
United Nations action in the field of human rights
through the promotion of international cooperation
and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality
and objectivity
31. Mr. Ferrer Arenas (Cuba) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, which had been
joined by Burkina Faso, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malawi, Myanmar,
Namibia, Qatar, the Russian Federation, South Africa,
the Sudan, Suriname and Turkmenistan. The United
Nations must promote respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms through international
cooperation, which was bound up with the principles of
non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity. For that
reason, due account should be taken of the political,
economic, social, historical and cultural specificities of
each country, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. He hoped that the draft
resolution, which was designed to ensure that
international cooperation made an effective and
practical contribution to the prevention of mass and
flagrant violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and to the strengthening of international
peace and security, would be adopted by consensus, as
its predecessors had been.
32. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Cape Verde, the Central African
Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic,
Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Sierra Leone,
Tunisia and Uganda had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.55: Respect for the
purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations to achieve international cooperation in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and for fundamental freedoms and in solving
international problems of a humanitarian character
33. Mr. Ferrer Arenas (Cuba) introduced the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, which had been
joined by Burkina Faso, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malawi, the Sudan and Suriname, and
recalled that Member States had undertaken to respect
and promote the fundamental principles of
international law embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations. They were thus required to contribute
regularly to the humanitarian activities conducted by
the international community to promote the
strengthening of cooperation among countries in that
area and also of understanding, trust, tolerance and
mutual respect geared to a fairer and non-violent
world. Cuba, which was a strong advocate of
multilateralism, urged all Member States to cooperate
constructively to promote and protect human rights and
encourage the peaceful settlement of international
problems of a humanitarian nature, respecting the
provisions of international law and particularly of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. He invited all delegations to vote in
favour of the draft resolution.
34. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Central African Republic had
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.39: Human rights and
cultural diversity
35. Mr. Khani Jooyabad (Islamic Republic of Iran),
introducing the draft resolution, said that Bangladesh,
Benin, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Jordan, Myanmar, Qatar and the Syrian Arab
Republic had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
He emphasized that intercultural dialogue had
important benefits and enriched the common
understanding of human rights, and that those rights
were universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated.
36. Some revisions had been made to the draft
resolution. The ninth preambular paragraph now read
“Taking note of the Non-Aligned Movement
Ministerial Meeting on Human Rights and Cultural
Diversity, held in Tehran on 3 and 4 September 2007”.
The fourteenth, seventeenth and twentieth preambular
paragraphs had been deleted. Lastly, paragraph 14 now
read “Stresses the necessity of freely using the media
and new information and communication technologies
to create the conditions for renewed dialogue among
cultures and civilizations”.
37. He expressed the hope that the draft resolution
would be adopted without a vote.
38. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Cameroon, Cape Verde, the Comoros,
the Gambia, Iraq, Mali, Mauritania, Nigeria, SouthA/C.3/62/SR.42
07-59056 6
Africa and Tunisia had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/62/L.37, L.41, L.43 and L.51)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.37: Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
39. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that in paragraph 1 (b) of the draft resolution the word
“continuing” should be inserted before “reports”.
Furthermore, paragraph 3 should be amended to read:
“While noting the prompt reaction of the Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the
latest floods, and the openness shown in seeking
outside assistance, expresses its very deep concern at
the precarious humanitarian situation in the country,
compounded by the misallocation of resources away
from the satisfaction of basic needs and by frequent
natural disasters, in particular the prevalence of
maternal and infant malnutrition, which, despite recent
progress, continues to affect the physical and mental
development of a significant proportion of children,
and urges the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in this regard, to take preventive
and remedial action, to facilitate access to
humanitarian aid and to take measures to allow
humanitarian agencies to secure its impartial delivery
to all parts of the country on the basis of need in
accordance with humanitarian principles, and to ensure
food security, including through sustainable
agriculture”.
40. Mr. Lobo de Mesquito (Portugal), introducing
the draft resolution on behalf of the European Union
and the other sponsors, which had been joined by
Andorra, Iceland, Moldova and Serbia, said that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had made
progress in the last year, but much remained to be
done.
41. The General Assembly, confronted with the
human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, should not remain silent. He urged
all Member States to give the draft resolution the
broadest possible support.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.41: Situation of human
rights in Myanmar
42. Mr. Lobo de Mesquito (Portugal), introducing
the draft resolution on behalf of the European Union
and the other sponsors, which had been joined by
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Moldova, said that the
situation in Myanmar remained a source of deep
concern, despite the positive steps that had been taken,
especially with regard to the visit to that country by the
Special Rapporteur. With a view to having the text
adopted by consensus, the sponsors of the draft
resolution had engaged in negotiations with the
delegation of Myanmar which had seemed to be
constructive until Myanmar had decided that a
consensus could not be achieved, despite the
amendments which the sponsors had been ready to
make. The sponsors remained open to further
consultations.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.43: Situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
43. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) drew
attention to a number of changes in the English text of
the draft resolution: in paragraph 2 (b) the word “of”
before “other” had been deleted; in paragraph 2 (f), the
words “and prevention of the Bahai faith” had been
replaced by “and preventing members of the Bahai
faith and”, the word “and” had been inserted before “an
increase in paces”.
44. Mr. Normandin (Canada), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the sponsors, which had been
joined by Iceland, drew attention to paragraph 2 (c),
where the words “sentences of stoning” had been
replaced by “sentences to execution by stoning”. In
addition paragraph 3 (e) had been revised to read: “To
eliminate, in law and in practice, all forms of
discrimination and other human rights violations
against women and girls”. In paragraph 4, the words
“thematic procedures” should be replaced by “special
thematic procedures”.
45. It was regrettable that the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran had not addressed the
concerns expressed by the General Assembly in the
resolution on the situation of human rights in that
country adopted at its sixty-first session. That situation
continued to deteriorate because the authorities
resorted to torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment, such as execution by stoning, toA/C.3/62/SR.42
7 07-59056
the violent repression of the activities of defenders of
women’s human rights, and to discrimination against
minorities.
46. The draft resolution had been carefully drafted to
ensure accuracy and to reflect the current situation in
the country. Member States had pledged to promote
universal respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms which the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran continued to deny its citizens. He
called on all Member States to vote in favour of the
draft resolution.
47. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Fiji had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.51: Situation of human
rights in Belarus
48. Mr. Rees (United States of America), introducing
the draft resolution on behalf of the sponsors, said that
although a resolution on Belarus had been adopted by
the Third Committee in 2004 and 2006 and by the
Commission on Human Rights three times in recent
years, the situation of human rights in Belarus had
continued to deteriorate. The departure of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Belarus
from the Human Rights Council in the summer of 2007
made it even more imperative for the Council to
examine closely the serious human rights violations
occurring in Belarus and to reaffirm its strong concern
about them. Referring to the third, fifth and sixth
preambular paragraphs, he said that intimidation of
political opponents had increased, press freedom had
been curtailed and the rights to freedom of speech,
assembly and association had been violated. The
harassment, detention and jailing of young people were
particularly troubling. Regrettably, the Government of
Belarus had not responded to repeated calls by the
General Assembly or to the recommendations of the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe for democratic governance and reform of its
human rights practices. The United Nations must
respond to Belarus’s failure to comply with its
international obligations and its continued repression
and intimidation of its people. Adoption of the draft
resolution would give hope to the people of Belarus
and would signify to the Government that the human
rights of its citizens must be respected. Failure to adopt
the draft resolution would ensure the Government’s
impunity and would be a terrible blow to the people.
He therefore urged delegations to support the draft
resolution and to consider joining the sponsors.
49. Mr. Tegos (Greece), speaking on a point of order,
said that the representative of the United States had
referred to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
as the Republic of Macedonia and recalled that,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 47/225, the
country should be referred to as the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.
50. The Chairman reminded delegations that all
States should be referred to by their official name.
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.1: Eliminating
rape and other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including as instruments to achieve
political or military objectives
51. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that
Costa Rica and Haiti had joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution.
52. The Chairman said that action on draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.1 would be deferred.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(f) Commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(continued) (A/C.3/62/L.28/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.28/Rev.1: International
Year of Human Rights Learning
53. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
54. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) said that Austria,
Barbados, Belize, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Qatar, Slovenia and Thailand
had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. He read
out the revisions that had been made to the text. A new
subparagraph had been added after the fourth
preambular paragraph which read: “Noting the
complementarity between the World Programme for
Human Rights Education and the International Year of
Human Rights Learning,”. Paragraph 4 had been
reworded to read: “Decides to commemorate theA/C.3/62/SR.42
07-59056 8
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights in a plenary meeting on 10 December
2008 and invites Member States to participate in it at
the highest level.” In paragraph 5 the words “the end of
the year during” had been inserted before the phrase
“its sixty-fourth session”. He believed that the draft
resolution would help to accelerate the realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms and hoped that
it would be adopted by consensus.
55. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Armenia, Croatia, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Honduras, Kazakhstan, Nicaragua,
Panama, Suriname and Turkey had joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution as orally revised.
56. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.28/Rev.1 was adopted.
Statements in exercise of the right of reply
57. Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) thanked the delegation
that had, for the third time in three years, decided to
submit a draft resolution on the situation of human
rights in Belarus (A/C.3/62/L.51). Even though the
tradition was an unfortunate one, the sponsors of the
draft resolution had been innovative by submitting a
draft of the text to his delegation before submitting it
to the Committee secretariat, and the main sponsor had
announced that consultations would be held on it,
although they had actually not been held.
58. Belarus was much more appreciative of the
progress made in institution-building within the Human
Rights Council. That progress led one to hope that
consideration of the human rights situation in
individual countries might be carried out in a fair,
non-selective and impartial manner.
59. Associating himself with the remarks made by
the representative of Singapore, he regretted that the
Third Committee had become a self-righteous body
committed to recrimination and unwilling to tolerate
any dissent. Many delegations felt that the parallel
consideration of human rights questions by the Third
Committee and the Council could be complementary,
but that was not the case; it was selective and partial.
Some delegations said they wanted to reply to the
reports on Belarus prepared by NGOs, but those
reports were no worse than those that Amnesty
International prepared on the countries that set
themselves up as judges. A more constructive and
responsible way of sharing such concerns would thus
have to be found. Belarus was interested in any kind of
assistance and guidance that would enable it to
improve the living conditions of its population, but it
could not accept threats, intimidation or arrogance.
60. He wondered whether the sponsors of the draft
resolution truly believed that a vote in the General
Assembly would make it possible to consider the
sensitive question of the promotion of human rights
properly. A vote did not settle disputes or bring parties
together. It was merely a means of legitimizing a split.
Remedies were to be found first and foremost in the
Charter of the United Nations: engagement and
cooperation. If the sponsors of the draft resolution
were as strong and virtuous as they believed
themselves to be, they might consider withdrawing
their text. If not, they could at least consider that the
no-action motion on the draft did not reflect a lack of
respect for their concerns but was in fact a positive
sign. Such a motion should only be adopted as a last
resort, and if it was adopted, it did not represent any
kind of victory. Victory lay in compromise and
dialogue.
61. Mr. Tin (Myanmar) said it was deplorable that
once again the European Union had failed to circulate
the text of draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.41, on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar, to his delegation
sufficiently in advance to have made a consensus
possible. If the European Union really wanted to
achieve consensus, it should not have submitted a text
that ran counter to the objective it sought. The text was
unfortunate and even harsher than the one submitted
the previous year, and it would in no way contribute to
the success of the Secretary-General’s good offices
mission. He deeply regretted that the draft text, which
targeted a particular country, contained elements
relating to matters that were solely within Myanmar’s
national jurisdiction rather than focusing on matters
that could have promoted cooperation. The draft text
was dominated by recent events in Myanmar. However,
during his visit to Myanmar from 3 to 8 November
2007, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Gambari, had observed that progress had been
made. The Special Adviser had met with the Prime
Minister, representatives of the monks and ethnic
groups, and with Aung San Suu Kyi, who had
authorized him to make a statement on her behalf in
which she had confirmed that she had had a
constructive exchange of views with the Liaison
Minister, Mr. Aung Kyi, and had met with senior
members of the National League for Democracy, andA/C.3/62/SR.42
9 07-59056
had said that she was prepared to cooperate with the
Government so that a dialogue could be maintained.
Cooperation with the United Nations was the
cornerstone of Myanmar’s foreign policy. He drew
attention to a press release that the Organization had
issued concerning the Special Adviser’s visit to
Myanmar and reaffirmed his country’s continued
willingness to cooperate with the good offices mission.
In conclusion, he said that the draft resolution utterly
failed to take into account the improvement that had
been observed in the situation in Myanmar.
62. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that his delegation rejected draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.37, on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
which had been submitted by the European Union. The
text reflected the politicization of human rights,
selectivity and a double standard that ran counter to the
will of most Member States. The draft was the product
of a political plot by the hostile forces of the European
Union and the United States of America, which sought
to paralyse the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The goal of the sponsors was to undermine the social
system of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
on the pretext of protecting human rights by distorting
the human rights situation in that country. Yet the most
serious violations in the world at present were the
massacres of innocent persons in Iraq, Afghanistan and
the Occupied Palestinian Territory that were being
carried out in the name of combating terrorism. He
wondered how the sponsors of the draft resolution
could speak of human rights when they had no
compunction about violating the right to survival by
invading and occupying sovereign States. The
European Union should attend to its own affairs and
eliminate such contemporary forms of racism as racial
discrimination, xenophobia and ill-treatment of
minorities within its member States. By submitting
draft resolutions that targeted developing countries
exclusively, the West only stirred up antagonism and
defiance in the parties concerned. The draft resolution
in question was a web of lies invented by hostile
forces, including Japan and the United States of
America, which devoted billions of dollars each year to
propaganda and other activities directed against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. For a number
of years the European Union had been responsible for
thwarting any prospect of cooperation with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the field of
human rights by submitting the draft resolution in the
Third Committee. His delegation once again rejected
the text and would continue to oppose any other
politicized draft resolution that targeted a specific
developing country.
63. Mr. Rezvani (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.43, on the situation of
human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, contained
conceptual and procedural gaps and presented
substantive problems. He recalled that five years
previously a simple court case that had evolved into a
bilateral dispute had led Canada to submit a draft
resolution on the Islamic Republic of Iran in the Third
Committee, which it had used as a medium for
transmitting its message to the international
community. His delegation, recognizing the
competence of the recently established Human Rights
Council, believed that such an action was a blatant
misuse of the Committee’s time and programme of
work. Looking beyond the question of the legitimacy
of submitting a politicized draft resolution, he
wondered why the Canadian delegation had chosen to
submit the text to the General Assembly when the
Member States had collectively given the Human
Rights Council the important task of the international
protection and promotion of human rights. On the
conceptual plane and citing the fourth preambular
paragraph and paragraph 3 by way of example, his
delegation noted that many provisions of the draft
resolution were entirely divorced from reality and that
the text was simply a list of unfounded allegations. He
recalled that the Islamic Republic of Iran had
experienced a much higher than average number of
visits from rapporteurs responsible for the thematic
special procedures of the former Commission on
Human Rights. It was a pity that the Canadian
delegation had nothing new to submit to the Third
Committee.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.