United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.48
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
7 February 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-60225 (E)
*1160225*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 48th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 21 November 2011, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 107: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)
Agenda item 108: International drug control (continued)A/C.3/66/SR.48
11-60225 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.44/Rev.1,
L.49/Rev.1, L.50/Rev.1 and L.51/Rev.1)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.56 and L.57/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.44/Rev.1: Promotion of the
Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote
and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms
1. Ms. Merchant (Norway) said that Costa Rica and
Thailand had joined the sponsors.
2. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Burkina Faso, Israel and the Niger had
joined the sponsors.
3. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.44/Rev.1 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.49/Rev.1: National
institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights.
4. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
5. Mr. Schroeer (Germany), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Costa Rica, India, Japan,
Maldives, New Zealand and Thailand had joined the
sponsors. The revised version of the draft resolution
contained editorial changes to paragraphs 7, 10, 16 and
18.
6. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador,
Lebanon, Mali, the Niger, Nigeria, Panama, the
Russian Federation, South Sudan, Togo, Uganda,
Ukraine, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of) had joined the sponsors.
7. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.49/Rev.1 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.50/Rev.1: International
Day of the Girl
8. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
9. Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) speaking also on
behalf of Peru and Turkey, said that the Bahamas,
Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Pakistan, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Togo, the United States of
America and Uruguay had joined the sponsors.
Establishing an International Day of the Girl Child
could raise awareness of the challenges that girls faced
every day and provide opportunities for them to show
leadership. The draft resolution and document
A/C.3/66/L.24/Rev.1, entitled The girl child, were
mutually reinforcing and complementary. A number of
revisions had been made to the draft text. The title had
been changed to “International Day of the Girl Child”,
which was also reflected in paragraphs 1 and 2. In
addition, the third preambular paragraph had been
replaced by the following text:
“Recognizing that empowerment of and
investment in girls, which are critical for
economic growth, the achievement of all
Millennium Development Goals, including the
eradication of poverty and extreme poverty, as
well as the meaningful participation of girls in
decisions that affect them, are key in breaking the
cycle of discrimination and violence and in
promoting and protecting the full and effective
enjoyment of their human rights, and further
recognizing that empowering girls requires their
active participation in decision making processes,
active support and engagement of their parents,
legal guardians, families and care providers, as
well as boys and men, and the wider
community;”.
10. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Armenia, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Czech
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, France,
Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Haiti, Jordan Kyrgyzstan,
Liberia, Mauritius, Montenegro, the Netherlands, the
Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Papua New Guinea, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis,A/C.3/66/SR.48
3 11-60225
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Suriname, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, the United
States of America and Zambia had joined the sponsors.
11. Mr. von Haff (Angola), speaking in explanation
of position on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), said that, instead of
including the draft resolution under agenda item 69 (b),
it should have been included under agenda item 65,
which dealt with the promotion and protection of the
rights of children. Human rights was just one of the
issues that needed to be addressed with regard to girls.
Biennially, SADC tabled a resolution entitled “The girl
child” under the agenda item on the promotion and
protection of the rights of children. The draft resolution
under consideration might erroneously be seen as a
parallel process to that draft resolution.
12. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.50/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.51/Rev.1: Protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism
13. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
14. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico), introducing the
draft resolution, said that Austria, Costa Rica, Egypt,
France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Poland, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the
Russian Federation, the United States of America and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the
sponsors. The approach taken in the draft resolution
would complement the work of the Human Rights
Council on the same topic.
15. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Angola, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador,
Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Panama, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Turkey
and Ukraine had joined the sponsors.
16. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.51/Rev.1 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.56: Situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
17. Ms. Ortigosa (Uruguay) said that her delegation
did not share the positions expressed by the Islamic
Republic of Iran on the State of Israel and on whether
or not the Holocaust was a matter of historical fact.
Efforts to guarantee full human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran had fallen short. Her delegation
radically disagreed with that country’s refusal to
cooperate with Argentine justice and with its use of the
death penalty, in particular for minors, and execution
by stoning.
18. Nonetheless, her country supported a human
rights approach which stressed cooperation before
proceeding to denunciation or confrontation. A
dynamic which focused exclusively on denunciation or
confrontation would be seriously limited. Uruguay had
therefore abstained from voting on the draft resolution.
While the invitation to the High Commissioner for
Human Rights to visit the Islamic Republic of Iran was
a step forward, the lengthy preparation time and delays
were cause for concern. Visits by special procedures
mandate holders should also be permitted.
19. Mr. Kimura (Japan) said that, while his
delegation had voted in favour of the draft resolution,
the Government of Japan had held a human rights
dialogue with the Islamic Republic of Iran earlier in
the year, and appreciated the continuation of dialogue
as indicative of a positive attitude. The Iranian
Government should implement the 123
recommendations made as part of the universal
periodic review, which it had accepted.
20. Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia) said that country-
specific resolutions were susceptible to politicization
and could detract attention from the objective of
effecting positive change. His country strongly
supported a non-confrontational approach, constructive
and respectful dialogue and cooperation, with respect
for national sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
Islamic Republic of Iran had recently taken steps to
demonstrate its engagement with the international
community on human rights issues.
21. Mr. Khan (Indonesia) said that politicization was
counterproductive and increased misunderstanding.
The negotiations over the draft resolution had been
highly politicized, resulting in a lack of meaningful
dialogue and cooperation.A/C.3/66/SR.48
11-60225 4
22. Mr. Fiallo (Ecuador) said that such draft
resolutions were not motivated by human rights
concerns. Pressure on nations of the South increased
divisions among States. Country-specific resolutions
had been used to justify intervention in sovereign
States.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.57/Rev.1: Situation of
human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
23. Mr. Wittig (Germany) said that Andorra,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bulgaria, Cape Verde,
Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Monaco, Montenegro,
New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and
Vanuatu had joined the sponsors.
24. Despite repeated calls from the international
community, including the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, widespread human rights
violations continued in the Syrian Arab Republic. The
death toll was mounting, with the most recent United
Nations estimates stating that more than 3,500 civilians
had been killed there. Syrian authorities had refused
access to the independent international commission,
although such access had been mandated by the Human
Rights Council.
25. It was important to support the strong and
remarkable stance taken by the League of Arab States
and, in particular, its efforts to bring about an
immediate end to the violence. The draft resolution
was a unique response to the critical events currently
taking place on the ground in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The initiative had substantial support from
States of the Arab League.
26. Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, said that the purpose of
France, Germany and the United Kingdom in
sponsoring the draft resolution was not to bolster
human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic but rather to
declare a political, media and diplomatic war on his
country.
27. He doubted that the suffering of millions of
civilians in his country owing to unilateral economic
sanctions had contributed to the reinforcement of
human rights. He also doubted that funding and arming
opposition groups and hosting their leaders in
conferences in the capital cities of some of the
sponsors, at which there had been calls for armed
rebellion and the overthrow of the Syrian Government,
served the cause of human rights.
28. Some of the sponsors of the draft resolution had
invaded and occupied other Member States, killing
millions of their citizens. Heads of State and Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of some of the sponsors had made
public statements which had the effect of interfering in
the internal affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic. Lies
had been told at the United Nations regarding civilian
casualty figures in his country. Many of the sponsors
supported secret prisons and mounting human rights
violations, including torture, in Iraq, Afghanistan and
Libya. France, the United Kingdom and the United
States of America still had colonies and hundreds of
military bases around the world.
29. The Western States that had sponsored the draft
resolution turned a blind eye to the Israeli occupation
of Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian
Golan. They were silent regarding Israeli massacres of
Arabs and the violation of the right to Palestinian self-
determination. Threats by some countries to veto the
Palestinian application for full membership in the
United Nations did not bolster human rights.
30. Other actions by some of the sponsors that neither
strengthened nor protected human rights included
discrimination against Roma people in Germany and
their eviction to Kosovo; the demolition of housing
units in France and the eviction of thousands of Roma
and related groups to Bulgaria and Romania; and
encouragement and protection of Islamophobia. The
ultimate goal of the sponsors was to put the United
Nations out of existence, just as European nations had
put the League of Nations out of existence in order to
satisfy their colonial greed and their desire to plunder
the wealth of the developing world.
31. Three of the European sponsors had caused
bloody world wars resulting in the deaths of 100
million people. Millions of people had served as
cannon fodder in those wars, including people from
former colonies, the Syrian Arab Republic among
them. Those European States oppressed their Arab
Muslim citizens and guests, prevented them from
constructing mosques and spread Islamophobia. Yet
they spoke about human rights as if they were moral
authorities. No European power had ever apologizedA/C.3/66/SR.48
5 11-60225
for the dark history of colonialism and slavery, nor had
any country paid reparations to the people of Asia,
Africa and Latin America for the crimes committed
against them.
32. The draft resolution would more appropriately be
entitled “The illness of animosity towards the Syrian
Arab Republic.” Those suffering from that illness
should be referred to a specialized hospital for
treatment rather than being permitted to engage in a
futile quest to infect the rest of the Member States.
Despite the negativity, the Syrian Arab Republic would
continue to move ahead with its political and other
reforms, which enjoyed a broad consensus in the
country.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.18/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.18/Rev.1: Violence against
women migrant workers
33. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
34. Ms. Werdaningtyas (Indonesia), introducing the
draft resolution also on behalf of the Philippines, said
that the Comoros, the Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Haiti, Mali, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Senegal, Seychelles,
Timor-Leste and the United Republic of Tanzania had
joined the sponsors. He pointed out a number of minor
revisions to the text to reflect the language that had
been agreed upon.
35. Globalization had created many employment
opportunities outside of workers’ countries of origin.
There had been some 214 million international migrant
workers in 2010, of whom 49 per cent had been
women. While such employment opportunities could
be empowering, they could also have adverse
consequences. Women’s vulnerability to inhuman
treatment, violence and abuse in the workplace had
numerous causes.
36. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Burkina Faso, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau,
Jamaica, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Uganda,
Zambia and Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors.
37. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.18/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
38. The Chair, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 55/488, suggested that the Committee should
take note of the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on
violence against women (A/66/215).
39. It was so decided.
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.69/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.69/Rev.1: Assistance to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa
40. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
41. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Brazil, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Francia,
Germany, Georgia, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America had joined the sponsors.
42. Ms. Sulimani (Sierra Leone), speaking on behalf
of the African Group, said that Spain had joined the
sponsors. African countries and the international
community were concerned about the increase in the
number of refugees in Africa. While the refugee
population in Africa had decreased slightly during
2010, that trend had been reversed in sub-Saharan
Africa in 2011.
43. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.69/Rev.1 was adopted.A/C.3/66/SR.48
11-60225 6
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.22/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.22/ Rev.1: Strengthening
collaboration on child protection within the United
Nations system
44. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
45. Mr. Srivali (Thailand), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Algeria, Belize, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, the Central African Republic,
Ecuador, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mali, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Senegal, the Sudan, Tajikistan and Zimbabwe had
joined the sponsors.
46. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Kyrgyzstan,
Mauritania, Namibia, South Sudan and Swaziland had
also joined the sponsors.
47. Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia), speaking on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
said that the member States of ASEAN firmly believed
that the draft resolution was a milestone in seeking
organizational improvement to protect children
worldwide. Further strengthening collaboration within
the United Nations was logical and necessary in light
of new developments around the world. In 2010, in a
historic step, ASEAN had established a Commission on
the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women
and Children.
The meeting was suspended at 4:10 p.m. and
resumed at 4:15 p.m.
48. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.22/Rev.1 was
adopted.
49. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his delegation was concerned that the draft resolution
infringed on the prerogatives of other United Nations
bodies and on the independence of mandate holders.
With regard to paragraph 2, the United States
reaffirmed its confidence in the relevant actors,
rejecting any interpretation that indicated lack of
confidence in them or that jeopardized the
independence of their work.
50. The lead sponsors had provided assurances that
the word “continue” in paragraph 2 related to both the
phrase “to exercise their functions in a fully
independent manner” as well as the phrase “to act in
full observance of their respective mandates.” That was
the interpretation of the United States. The wording
was, at best, infelicitous and, in future, should be
replaced with a less ambiguous formulation.
51. The language in the sixth preambular paragraph
reaffirming the role of the General Assembly in the
United Nations child protection system ignored the
important work of other United Nations bodies. The
work of the General Assembly should not be given
precedence over that of other United Nations bodies
that were independent of the General Assembly. The
United States applauded the important work of the
relevant actors who made invaluable contributions to
the well-being of children. Child protection was often
broader than protection of the rights of the child.
52. Lastly, the report requested in paragraph 4 would
duplicate other work and must not be interpreted to
permit State interference in the work of the relevant
actors. Independence and impartiality were the
foundation of the work of the mandate holders for the
rights of the child and child protection.
53. Ms. Merchant (Norway), speaking also on behalf
of Liechtenstein and Switzerland, said that work on
child protection was widely regarded as a United
Nations success story. There was no need for the
General Assembly to take any initiatives regarding
information sharing among United Nations child rights
actors. Such initiatives could challenge and undermine
the independence of the relevant mandate holders.
There was a concern that, as worded, the draft
resolution could call into question whether the relevant
United Nations actors had been observing their
mandates. That was an inappropriate message to send.
54. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) said that the draft
resolution was positive and conducive to helping the
relevant United Nations actors do a better job to
strengthen compliance with child protection standards.
55. Ms. Grabianowska (Poland), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that there were serious
concerns regarding the text and aim of the draft
resolution and that the added value of the text remained
unclear. Great progress had been made in children’s
rights thanks to the United Nations actors.A/C.3/66/SR.48
7 11-60225
56. It was important for all Member States to respect
the work of all mandate holders and allow them to
work independently without pressure or intimidation.
The word “continue” in paragraph 2 was understood to
refer to the rest of the sentence in its entirety. The
report requested of the Secretary-General in paragraph
4 was not an evaluation mechanism but rather an
opportunity to demonstrate effective collaboration
among child protection actors.
57. Ms. Murillo Ruin (Costa Rica) said that the
language of the draft resolution could not be
interpreted in a way which was prejudicial to the
position of the Secretary-General.
58. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that the language of the
draft resolution was very appropriate and reflected the
expectations of the general membership with regard to
the relevant mandate holders. The controversy raised
earlier had been completely unnecessary. All mandate
holders must adhere fully to their mandates. That was
what the Member States expected of them.
59. Mr. Tagle (Chile) said that the draft resolution in
no way limited the independence of the mandate
holders. Their impartiality was extremely important,
and they would certainly continue along those lines.
Agenda item 107: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.15/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.15/Rev.1: Strengthening the
United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice
programme, in particular its technical cooperation
capacity
60. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
61. Mr. Mogini (Italy) said that Dominica had joined
the sponsors. Transnational organized crime
jeopardized security, obstructed the functioning of
public institutions, undermined respect for human
rights and harmed legitimate economic activities. It
operated as a global business which sought to reap big
profits. Curbing its financial power would affect its
raison d’être. Targeting huge illegal assets accumulated
by criminals around the world must be a major thrust
of international cooperation.
62. New elements of the draft resolution included
asset recovery and a reference to the return of illicitly
acquired assets to countries of origin, implementation
of a global plan of action on human trafficking and
launch of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Victims of Trafficking in Persons, especially Women
and Children.
63. New language focused on the efforts of the
Secretary-General to develop an effective and
comprehensive approach to transnational organized
crime and drug trafficking; the need for a
comprehensive and integrated approach to crime
prevention and criminal justice reform at the national
and regional levels; the need to strengthen the capacity
of criminal justice systems to investigate and prosecute
all forms of crime while protecting defendants’ human
rights and fundamental freedoms; and the successful
outcome of the recent fourth session of the Conference
of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Corruption, held in Marrakesh.
64. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Andorra, Cape Verde, the Central
African Republic, the Comoros, Ecuador, Kenya,
Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, the
Philippines, Saudi Arabia, South Sudan, Tunisia,
Zambia and Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors.
65. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.15/Rev.1 was
adopted.
66. Ms. Löw (Switzerland) said that regrettably,
delegations had been unable to agree on a direct
reference to the task force on transnational organized
crime and drug trafficking created earlier in the year at
the initiative of the Secretary-General.
67. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her delegation had
concerns regarding imprecise statements in the
eleventh, fourteenth and sixteenth preambular
paragraphs of the draft resolution that were not
substantiated by legal instruments in the area. Fighting
transnational organized crime would not have an
impact on international peace and security. Her country
did not recognize systematic links between
transnational organized crime, gun trafficking and
terrorist activities. Each type of crime had different
motivations, and automatically linking them violated
norms of due process and the presumption of
innocence. Such links should be analyzed on a case-by-
case basis.
68. There was no generally accepted definition of
terrorism, including State terrorism, so it was not
possible to discuss shared responsibility in combatingA/C.3/66/SR.48
11-60225 8
terrorism. The sixteenth preambular paragraph of the
draft resolution ran counter to the Bangkok Declaration
on Synergies and Responses: Strategic Alliances in
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice with regard to
international cooperation in combating transnational
crime. Moreover, terrorism should be addressed in the
Sixth Committee.
69. The Chair suggested, in accordance with General
Assembly decision 55/488, that the Committee should
take note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
follow-up to the Twelfth United Nations Congress on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (A/66/91) and
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime on its fifth session (A/66/92).
70. It was so decided.
Agenda item 108: International drug control
(continued) (A/C.3/66/L.16/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.16/Rev.1: International
cooperation against the world drug problem
71. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
72. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) said that
Afghanistan, Algeria, Austria, the Bahamas, Belize,
Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominica, France, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Poland, Portugal, Singapore,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland had joined the sponsors. The draft
resolution had been updated by mentioning progress
achieved during the past year in the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs.
73. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina
Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Ecuador, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Jamaica, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Mali, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, the Philippines, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Swaziland, Sweden, Tunisia, Turkey, Vanuatu
and Zambia had joined the sponsors.
74. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.16/Rev.1 was
adopted.
75. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that efforts to reduce illicit
drugs crops fell far short of the objectives set forth in
the relevant international conventions. Illicit drug
production had increased tremendously in recent years,
which had had a major impact on transit countries. Her
delegation had reservations with regard to paragraphs
18 and 19 of the draft resolution. It did not recognize
systematic links between illicit drug trafficking and
other types of transnational international crime, each of
which had different motives and patterns. Such
automatic linking ran counter to due process and the
presumption of innocence. Cooperation should not be
limited to technical and financial assistance and should
be carried out with full respect for non-intervention in
the internal affairs of other States and respect for
sovereignty.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.