United Nations A/C.3/62/SR.46
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-second session
Official Records
Distr.: General
24 December 2007
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
07-59992 (E)
*0759992*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 46th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 15 November 2007, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Wolfe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Jamaica)
Contents
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 68: Elimination of racism and racial discrimination (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)A/C.3/62/SR.46
07-59992 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.29)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29: Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty
1. The Chairman said that a recorded vote had
been requested on the draft resolution as a whole.
2. The Reverend Robert Meyer (Observer for the
Holy See), said that the Holy See had consistently
advocated absolute respect for the right to life. While
understanding and respecting the many deeply held
positions on the matter, the Holy See welcomed the
draft resolution as a sign of the growing public
opposition to the death penalty.
3. The right to life and respect for the human
dignity of all people was an inalienable right of all
persons and a founding principle of the United Nations.
Member States should therefore promote and protect
that right from the time of conception until the time of
natural death and should work to reverse attitudes that
tried to justify the destruction of human life on legal or
medical grounds. As modern society had many other
ways of protecting its citizens from aggressors, the
death penalty was no longer necessary. It often
reflected public desire for vengeance or revenge, yet it
was the poor and religious, ethnic and racial minorities
who all too often suffered its effects. Member States
supporting the resolution should be consistent and
extend their protection to the life of the unborn child.
States should show true courage by rejecting killing of
any kind and by using bloodless methods of deterrence
and punishment.
4. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana) deeply regretted that
the Committee was being forced to vote on a very
divisive resolution that did not in any way contribute to
the promotion and protection of human rights.
Botswana would vote against the resolution and
dissociate itself from the text to be adopted by the
General Assembly on that subject.
5. The submission of a draft resolution calling for
the abolition of capital punishment could only promote
the same politicization of the work of the Committee
that had led to the demise of the Commission on
Human Rights. It was unnecessary at a time when the
Human Rights Council had just adopted a package on
institution-building to promote and protect human
rights. Botswana had joined a group of countries that
had proposed amendments to the text, but the European
Union and other sponsors had refused to accept them,
violating the principles of open dialogue and
transparency. No amount of intimidation would cause
the Government of Botswana to go against the
expressed wish of its people to retain the death penalty.
6. Botswana had been founded on the principles of
democracy, equality, just and honest government,
respect for human rights and the rule of law. For the
last four decades, consistent efforts had been made to
build a more open, just and tolerant society that was
responsive to the needs of its people and engaged in
dialogue with a view to building national consensus.
Capital punishment was not prohibited in international
law and the State exercised its sovereign authority on
that matter, defining what was a crime and what was
the appropriate punishment. The State was responsible
for order, stability and security and anyone inclined to
commit a serious crime should be aware of the
consequences of their actions if convicted by a
competent and independent court. Botswana was not
prepared to give advance assurances that it would
provide lifelong facilities and care for the perpetrators
of serious crimes at the taxpayers’ expense.
7. Some countries had exercised their sovereign
right to either abolish or impose a moratorium on
capital punishment. He commended them for their
noble decisions but reminded them that their actions
did not set norms and standards for other States in
different national circumstances.
8. It was war, and the right of States to wage war,
that should be abolished. War was the most blatant
violation of the right to life and security of the person,
as it killed people indiscriminately and left many
others homeless and disabled. If States were serious
about protecting the right to life and security then they
should focus on stopping wars. If States retained the
right to wage war, then they retained the right to kill.
9. Mr. Spatafora (Italy) hoped that approval of the
draft resolution would begin a process of cooperation
characterized by dignity and mutual respect. The
culture of the United Nations was not one of fighting
but one of building together under the guidance of theA/C.3/62/SR.46
3 07-59992
United Nations Charter and of bridging different
visions and interests.
10. A former President of the General Assembly, Jan
Eliasson, had said that “Without passion, nothing
happens in life. Without compassion, the wrong things
happen”. That was the spirit in which States should
approach the vote.
11. Mr. Saeed (Sudan) said that his delegation had
voted in favour of the proposed amendments, and
would vote against the draft resolution, which was
counter to the objectives of the United Nations Charter
and was not directly related to the issue of human
rights. There was no consensus in international law on
the death penalty issue and the previous votes had
made it clear that there was no agreement among
Member States. The draft resolution was an attempt by
one group of countries to impose its wishes on all
countries. Each State had the right to choose its own
social, economic, political and cultural system, free
from interference from any other State. The draft
resolution was an erroneous attempt to incorporate
abolition of the death penalty in international law and
he invited other Member States to vote against it.
12. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that all attempts to
improve the language of the draft resolution had gone
unheeded. The draft resolution did not take into
account the need to deal decisively with extrajudicial
executions. It reflected the needs of specific social
settings, while ignoring the great diversity of legal,
social, economic and cultural conditions in the world,
and the fact that not all rules were appropriate for all
societies at all times. The issue should have been dealt
with in the Human Rights Council, in a comprehensive
manner that covered the right to life in all its diverse
aspects, if there was a real political will and
determination to reinforce the Council’s role. If there
was an international will to amend the relevant
provisions in the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, then a due process of negotiation
should take place.
13. Some Member States had voluntarily decided to
abolish the death penalty and others had chosen to
apply a moratorium on executions, while many others
retained the death penalty in their legislations. All were
acting in compliance with their obligations under the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
no State should impose its freely chosen viewpoint on
another.
14. The same countries that had always discouraged
no-action motions, particularly in the case of country-
specific resolutions, were now using one to block
requests for separate votes on certain paragraphs of the
draft resolution. All the principles, rules and norms
usually followed in the United Nations had been
broken in the case of the draft resolution. One could
only wonder for what purpose and to what end.
15. Some speakers had claimed that there was a trend
towards the abolition of the death penalty in the world,
but the only trend visible over the past two days had
been a departure from all that was sacred, including the
right to life of the unborn child. His delegation therefore
found itself obliged to vote against the draft resolution.
16. Mr. Sergiwa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that
the death penalty was a controversial issue. Some
Member States had abolished it, while others had
retained it as a deterrent to be applied to the most
serious crimes and to ensure justice for victims who
had been deprived of their right to life.
17. The draft resolution was an attempt by the
sponsoring States to impose their values and norms on
other Member States, despite the international
recognition of the fact that there was no direct link
between the death penalty and human rights. The draft
resolution constituted interference in the sovereign
rights of Member States, which had the right to adopt
legal sanctions and penalties reflecting their
sociocultural and religious contexts.
18. All the amendments submitted had been rejected.
If Member States really wished to uphold the right to
life, they should take measures against abortion, which
was a death penalty for an unborn child who had
committed no crime. To guarantee the right to life, they
should abolish war, and end all forms of foreign
occupation.
19. In the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the death penalty
was applied in only two specific cases: for
premeditated murder and for crimes that constituted a
grave threat to society. His delegation would therefore
vote against the draft resolution and advised other
delegations to do the same.
20. Mr. Suárez (Colombia) said that his country’s
sponsorship of the draft resolution was in accordance
with the Colombian Constitution and legislation and
with international instruments that it had ratified. His
delegation had opposed the set of proposedA/C.3/62/SR.46
07-59992 4
amendments to the current draft resolution, not for
substantive reasons but in order to preserve the spirit of
the draft resolution, whose main objective was to seek
a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to
moving towards its abolition. States should take into
account its limited effectiveness as a deterrent, as well
as its negative and irreversible consequences in
relation to rights such as the right to life, the right not
to be subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading
punishment and the right to due process. The
promotion of all human rights and fundamental human
freedoms had to be considered a priority objective of
the United Nations. Adoption of the draft resolution
could lead to the launching of a regional and universal
dialogue to promote the moratorium and significant
progress in implementing the spirit of the resolution.
21. Ms. Booker (Bahamas) said that her delegation
would have preferred a paragraph-by-paragraph vote
on the draft resolution, as even the sponsors had not
reached agreement on it and many amendments had
been proposed. It was surprising that three open
informal meetings had failed to produce a revised
version of the text and that none of the proposed
amendments, even those described as “constructive” at
those meetings, had been included. She wondered
whether the sponsors had given any serious
consideration to the amendments.
22. Her country prided itself on adhering to the
fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual,
irrespective of race, place of origin, political opinion,
colour, creed or sex, as guaranteed in its Constitution.
It was committed to upholding the principles of
international law, including respect for sovereignty and
the juridical equality of States, territorial integrity,
peaceful dispute resolution and non-interference in the
internal affairs of States. The Bahamas had always
considered and continued to consider the death penalty
as a legal matter to be decided by individual States
without interference, in accordance with international
law. She would therefore vote against the draft
resolution.
23. As the previous vote had shown, the issue was
divisive. Those who had previously abstained should
consider voting against the draft resolution, as even
within some sponsoring Member States, political
parties were exploiting the issue for political purposes.
24. If the matter were to be dealt with in another
forum, she suggested that the Sixth Committee would
be the appropriate place. She was sure that most
Member States were acting in compliance with
international law, including those which had voted in
favour of the amendments.
25. Mr. Hadrami (Mauritania) said that his country
was against the abolition of the death penalty and
would therefore vote against the draft resolution. The
death penalty was not prohibited by international law
and was not a human rights issue to be addressed by
the international community, but was a matter of
national sovereignty for each State. The current
controversy was only creating a useless and futile
division between States, and he supported the idea of
referring the matter to the Sixth Committee.
26. Mr. Makanga (Gabon) said that his country,
which had abolished the death penalty some time ago,
was one of the sponsors of the draft resolution and
would vote in favour of it. Its adoption would be an
important part of the process leading to the abolition of
the death penalty. The text reflected the view shared by
many States that human dignity was sacred and should
be protected. While Member States had the right to
defend their values and principles, it was important to
remember the need for unity in diversity. Their
differences should be seen not as obstacles but as
contributions to general progress. It was important to
recognize both their differences and their unity as
members of the great family of the United Nations.
They should continue to have the courage to consider
all issues, however controversial. Controversy served
the cause of truth and Member States should continue
to work together to respect their values and differences.
Despite their passions, they should preserve their
reason, which was the key to the future of humanity.
27. The Chairman invited explanations of vote
before the vote.
28. Mr. Rastam (Malaysia) said that human rights
issues should be addressed through a constructive
dialogue-based approach that respected the principles
of sovereignty and non-interference. Member States
should understand and respect the viewpoints of other
countries, even when opposed to their own. All
viewpoints should be considered. The language of the
draft resolution included assumptions and erroneous
facts, yet the proposed amendments, many of which
were reasonable and acceptable to States on both sides
of the question, had not been adopted. Without theA/C.3/62/SR.46
5 07-59992
amendments, the draft resolution was unbalanced and
his delegation would therefore vote against it.
29. Whatever the outcome of the vote, the divisions
in the Committee constituted a defeat for all States. If
the main sponsors had hoped that the views of some
States would evolve, they had taken the wrong
approach. In any country, changes had to occur at a
pace that was acceptable to its people and without any
external pressure or interference. The non-acceptance
of amendments only served to confirm that external
values were being imposed on countries. He hoped that
in the future all Member States would respect the
viewpoints of other countries and understand the need
for reason when dealing with such a controversial and
sensitive issue.
30. Mr. Menon (Singapore) said that, despite the
concerns expressed and the amendments proposed, the
sponsors had shown no desire to seek a consensus and
the main sponsors had even gone so far as to suppress
freedom of expression. They had claimed to support
the United Nations Charter but refused to acknowledge
one of its key principles. They had claimed to oppose
selective quotations but quoted selectively themselves.
They had claimed the question was a human rights
issue but did not find anything in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights to support their claim.
They had claimed to have held an open dialogue but
had voted against all amendments. They had claimed to
support freedom of expression but were voting to deny
it to others. They had claimed not to seek to impose
their views but intended to force through a resolution
that was unacceptable to a significant number of
countries. Such behaviour was sanctimonious,
hypocritical and intolerant.
31. The sponsors had merely sought to impose their
beliefs on everyone else without even acknowledging
that other views existed, or that there were different
systems in different countries. The text therefore did
not reflect the range of opinion that existed in the
United Nations and directly contradicted the spirit of
cooperation and consensus building that was supposed
to be the foundation of the Committee’s work. No self-
respecting country could endorse that approach.
32. The merits or demerits of the death penalty were
not the issue. Every country had the sovereign right to
choose its own political, economic, social and legal
system in accordance with its own best interests.
Respect for human rights had to include respect for
differences and the United Nations supported diversity
and tolerance for diversity, even when there was
disagreement. His delegation would therefore vote
against the draft resolution and called on other
delegations to do the same.
33. Mr. Owoseni (Nigeria) said that the death penalty
was applied in Nigeria to ensure the security of citizens
and deter crime. His delegation could not accept the
statement in the draft resolution according to which the
death penalty undermined human dignity. Nor could it
accept the call on States that still maintained the death
penalty to restrict its use. Capital punishment was
applied in Nigeria only for the most serious criminal
offences and only after exhaustive legal and judicial
processes had been followed, including recourse to the
Supreme Court. Moreover, there had been no capital
punishment in recent years. A moratorium on the death
penalty fell within the domestic jurisdiction of States
and should not be imposed by any group of States
irrespective of their views on the subject. The matter
should be a subject of negotiation and agreement more
as a criminal law matter at the international level than
as a human rights issue. His delegation was
disappointed at the outcome of the negotiations, and the
division on the issue was disturbing. It was unfortunate
that the sponsors have been unable to support any of the
amendments proposed. His delegation would vote
against the draft resolution.
34. Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone) said that his delegation
would abstain in the vote on the draft resolution. The
death penalty was still in force in his country, although
only for the most serious crimes. Since it had not been
applied for several years, there was a de facto
moratorium in Sierra Leone. During the period when
the most horrific crimes had been unleashed on his
country, causing so much senseless suffering, the
Government had recognized that asking for the
assistance of the international community and
requesting the establishment of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone meant that the death penalty would not be
imposed. Sierra Leone could not support any resolution
that would be inconsistent with its Constitution.
35. Mr. Degia (Barbados) said that any attempt by a
country or group of countries to impose its values on
other Member States with a call to abolish the death
penalty or establish a moratorium on its use was an
infringement of the sovereignty of those Member States.
Although the Government of Barbados had not carried
out an execution in close to a quarter of a century, theA/C.3/62/SR.46
07-59992 6
death penalty existed in its statute law, and his country
had the right to retain it or abolish it. Barbados was a
signatory to all the major regional and international
human rights conventions and treaties. The death
penalty was applied only after an exhaustive process of
appeals. When the Caribbean Court of Justice had
replaced the British Privy Council as the highest court
of appeal, the Privy Council had ruled that the death
penalty on the statutes of Barbados was lawful and in
conformity with the Constitution. The death penalty was
not prohibited in international law, in the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, or in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Barbados
wished to exercise its sovereign right to use it as a
deterrent to the most serious crimes. Capital punishment
was a criminal justice issue; it was an internal matter,
and Barbados would deal with it in keeping with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter and the human
rights treaties to which it was a party. His delegation
would vote against the draft resolution.
36. Mr. Ramadan (Lebanon) said that in his country
the death penalty was applied only in a very few cases
to extremely serious crimes. The issue of capital
punishment was within the purview of sovereign States
under their Penal Codes. The issue should be dealt with
in an open and inclusive manner, not by imposing the
will of some at the expense of others, especially when
it was clear that no consensus was emerging. His
delegation had participated actively in the informal
discussions on the draft resolution and had submitted
several proposals that would have helped to bridge the
gap between the differing views on the issue. The
sponsors had not submitted a compilation text nor had
they taken into account the majority of the proposals
put forward. Lebanon wanted to reach the goal of
abolishing the death penalty in the near future but in a
manner that would respect its legislative system and its
internal legal procedures. The manner in which the
draft had been handled could lead to the future
submission of other drafts on issues that did not enjoy
wide consensus. His delegation would abstain in the
vote on the draft resolution.
37. Mr. Acharya (Nepal) said that the Constitution
of Nepal had abolished capital punishment. His
delegation supported the moratorium on executions as
well as the abolition of the death penalty. It was not
Nepal’s intention to offend or to contribute to divisions
or to the imposition of any values on others. His
delegation would vote in favour of the draft resolution.
38. Mr. Punkrasin (Thailand) said that one of the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations was that of non-interference in matters
pertaining to the domestic jurisdiction of States. The
moratorium should remain a matter pertaining to
domestic legal affairs. Thailand had amended its
domestic legislation to bring it into line with the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
which did not prohibit the death penalty. His country’s
legislation provided extensive safeguards to ensure due
process. While no execution had been carried out in
Thailand for a period of time, it was important to note
that the majority of the Thai population still regarded
the death penalty as an effective deterrent to crime.
The manner in which the draft resolution had been
pushed forward left much to be desired. A more
constructive process could have yielded a more
positive outcome on such a divisive issue. Thailand
would vote against the draft resolution.
39. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/62/L.29.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).A/C.3/62/SR.46
7 07-59992
Against:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United
States of America, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Belarus, Bhutan, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Congo, Cuba, Djibouti,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Madagascar, Morocco, Nauru, Niger, Palau,
Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone, Solomon
Islands, Swaziland, Togo, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia.
40. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.29 was adopted by
99 votes to 52, with 33 abstentions.
41. The Chairman invited explanations of vote after
the vote.
42. Mr. Machotra (India) said that States had the
sovereign right to determine their own legal system.
There was no consensus on the issue of capital
punishment, which was not prohibited by the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In
India, the death penalty was an exceptional punishment
imposed only in rare cases where the crime committed
was so heinous as to shock the conscience of society.
Since 1995, there had only been one instance of the
death penalty being used in India, and the legislation
provided for all the requisite procedural safeguards.
Provision was also made for suspension of the death
penalty for pregnant women, and juvenile offenders
could not be sentenced to death under any
circumstances. He had voted against the draft
resolution, as it went against his country’s statute law.
43. Ms. Joseph (Saint Lucia) said that her country
retained the death penalty on its laws. The issue should
be discussed in the context of each country’s own
internal legal system. Her delegation had voted against
the draft resolution.
44. Ms. Mballa Eyenga (Cameroon) said that the
Penal Code of Cameroon provided for capital
punishment, and her Government could not vote for
something that was not consistent with its legislation.
The last recorded case of a death sentence being
carried out dated back several years and Cameroon was
thus applying a de facto moratorium on the death
penalty.
45. The question of the death penalty and the
moratorium should be considered in the context of each
State’s circumstances. Time was needed to raise
awareness and educate the population in order to
persuade them to accept the idea of abolishing the
death penalty. Otherwise, people would be tempted to
take the law into their own hands in seeking to avenge
victims of criminal acts. Consultations should be
continued at all levels of society before a final decision
was taken on the question. While awaiting the outcome
of that national process, Cameroon had had no
alternative but to abstain in the vote on the draft
resolution.
46. Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar), speaking also on behalf of
Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman and Saudi Arabia, all of which
had voted against the draft resolution, said that the
issue of the death penalty was covered by the sovereign
right of States to choose their own legal system. The
results of the vote were regrettable, as the draft
resolution represented an interference in the internal
affairs of Member States and infringed the sovereign
rights of Member States as guaranteed in the Charter of
the United Nations. The adoption of the draft
resolution would further politicize the issue.
47. Mr. Shinyo (Japan) said that Japan had voted
against the draft resolution. The question of whether to
abolish the death penalty or establish a moratorium on
executions should be decided only after every country
had considered it carefully, taking into account public
opinion and its criminal justice policy. In Japan,
opinion polls had consistently shown that the majority
of the public believed the most vicious criminals
should receive the death sentence. Unfortunately,
felonious crimes such as mass murder continued to be
committed. For those reasons, it was difficult for Japan
to move towards abolition of the death penalty.A/C.3/62/SR.46
07-59992 8
48. There was no international consensus on the
abolishment of the death penalty. It was regrettable that
the sponsors of the draft resolution had submitted it
without much discussion. Many countries that
continued to regard the death penalty as justified in
certain instances had voiced strong opposition to the
proposal in informal meetings. The sponsoring
countries had proceeded with the draft resolution
without enough dialogue and discussion, choosing a
course that was not constructive.
49. Mr. Pham Hai Anh (Viet Nam) said that his
delegation had abstained in the vote. Under the
circumstances prevailing in his country, the death
penalty was indispensable to ensure a peaceful life for
all citizens and safeguard the common interests of the
community. The death penalty was applicable only to
the most serious crimes and not to juveniles, pregnant
women or women with children under three years of
age. Viet Nam’s policy was to gradually narrow the
scope of application of the death penalty with a view to
abolishing it in the future.
50. Mr. Rees (United States of America) said that his
delegation recognized that the supporters of the draft
resolution had principled positions on the issue of the
death penalty. Nonetheless, it was important to
recognize that international law did not prohibit capital
punishment. The International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights specifically recognized the right of
countries to impose the death penalty for the most
serious crimes, provided it was carried out pursuant to
a final judgement rendered by a competent court and in
accordance with appropriate safeguards and observance
of due process. The United States urged all States that
applied the death penalty to do so in conformity with
their international human rights obligations and to
ensure that it was not applied in an extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary manner.
51. Ms. Zhang Dan (China) said that the fact that
52 countries had voted against the draft resolution was
proof that there was no international consensus on the
issue of the death penalty. Her delegation therefore had
serious doubts about the effectiveness of the draft
resolution. All countries had the right to choose their
own political, economic, social and judicial systems in
the light of their specific situation, in exercise of their
inalienable sovereignty. The death penalty was an issue
of criminal justice which fell within the sphere of the
internal affairs of individual countries. Her delegation
deplored the rejection of the request for a vote on
separate paragraphs of the draft resolution, an action
that violated the rights of Member States to express
their views. Her delegation respected the choice made
by those countries that had decided to apply a
voluntary moratorium on the death penalty or to
abolish it. She hoped that the sponsors of the draft
resolution would show the same respect for other
countries and not try to impose their views on others.
52. Ms. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania)
said that her delegation had abstained in the vote on the
draft resolution. The death penalty was still lawful in
her country and was applied in a manner consistent
with the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. It was applied only for the most serious crimes
of murder and treason, and all trials in capital cases
followed strict procedures to safeguard the prisoner’s
rights. Her country was engaged in a public discussion
on the death penalty. While that exercise was going on,
her Government had been observing a de facto
moratorium on the death penalty, which had not been
applied for the last 12 years.
53. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that, in
accordance with article 6 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, the Syrian authorities
imposed the death penalty only for the most serious
crimes on the basis of national legislation and social
and cultural values, while taking into consideration the
need to protect the rights of the victim. His delegation
had voted against the draft resolution, which
constituted direct interference in the internal affairs of
States and an attempt to limit their political
independence.
54. Mr. Dorji (Bhutan) said that, although his
country had abolished the death penalty and would like
to see that step taken worldwide, his delegation had
abstained in the vote, because of its view that each
country was entitled to enact its own laws.
55. Ms. Bowen (Jamaica) said that the draft
resolution was highly contentious and its adoption had
been no triumph. The vote had demonstrated that a
number of States strongly resisted interference in their
internal affairs and sought to protect their sovereignty.
His delegation had voted against the text out of respect
for national laws, international obligations and the
people of Jamaica. Any change in his country’s
position on the death penalty should not be imposed
from outside but decided by the country itself.A/C.3/62/SR.46
9 07-59992
56. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) said that his delegation’s
attempts to align the language of the draft resolution
with the relevant international instruments had been in
vain. It was a State’s sovereign right to determine what
legal penalties were appropriate for its society. In
accordance with international law, the death penalty
should be reserved for the most serious crimes.
International efforts should focus on guaranteeing due
process of law and ensuring that extrajudicial or
arbitrary executions were prohibited. The draft
resolution tried to impose a reinterpretation of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on
all Member States. If carried out without a
comprehensive multilateral debate, reinterpretations of
the basic human rights instruments were detrimental to
the promotion of international human rights law.
57. Mr. Islam (Bangladesh) said that his country
imposed the death penalty only for the most serious
crimes and subject to provisions designed to avoid
miscarriage of justice. Extreme caution was exercised
throughout that transparent process. Opportunities for
redress were available at all legal stages and
presidential clemency was possible. Despite the
growing trend against the death penalty, his delegation
had voted against the draft resolution because the time
was not yet ripe for total abolition of that form of
punishment.
58. Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda) said that the
draft resolution constituted an attempt by the sponsors
to impose their views. Her delegation resisted any idea
that States were unable to determine by themselves
what governance systems suited them best but needed
guidance by some Governments, which claimed moral
superiority. There was no international consensus on
the death penalty. A moratorium on executions and,
conceivably, the abolition of the death penalty could
only be the result of a broad-based domestic decision.
59. Mr. Khani (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
his delegation had voted against the draft resolution,
which undermined article 6 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. His country
dissociated itself from the resolution.
60. Ms. Al-Zibdeh (Jordan) said that her delegation
had voted against the draft resolution, because the
death penalty issue should be resolved on the basis of
national legislation and domestic considerations. In
line with the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, the death penalty was imposed in her
country only for rape, murder and terrorist acts, subject
to a number of legal safeguards. Amnesty was possible.
61. Mr. Hetanang (Botswana), regretting the
outcome of the vote, predicted that at the next session
the European Union could well propose another
divisive resolution providing for the abolition of the
death penalty. However, the death penalty issue should
be resolved by national parliaments.
62. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) said that his country
had observed a de facto moratorium on executions
since the 1980s. His delegation had voted in favour of
the resolution and had not intended to impose its views
on any other country.
63. Mr. Menon (Singapore) stressed that the
sponsors’ pyrrhic victory had proved the lack of
international consensus on the death penalty. The
sponsors, oblivious to the diversity of domestic
circumstances, had presented the draft resolution in full
awareness of its divisive nature. The vote had polarized
Member States and engendered extreme acrimony. He
did not expect any countries to observe a moratorium
on executions because of the resolution, which had
made a mockery of the Committee’s proceedings.
64. Mr. Myint (Myanmar), noting that no execution
had been carried out in his country since 1988, said
that his delegation had voted against the draft
resolution because of the way in which the text had
been negotiated and adopted. Every Member State had
the right to make its own political, economic, social
and cultural choices. In Myanmar’s view, the
resolution as drafted was an attempt to impose a
particular choice on a number of countries.
65. Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda) pointed out that the
1994 genocide could have led Rwanda to retain the
death penalty in order to punish the perpetrators. Yet
his Government, convinced that the death penalty did
not improve the behaviour of the citizens, had
abolished that form of punishment. Accordingly, his
delegation had voted in favour of the resolution.A/C.3/62/SR.46
07-59992 10
Agenda item 42: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.64
and L.67)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.64: Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
66. Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.64 also on behalf of Benin,
Luxembourg, Montenegro and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, said that the sponsors, guided
by a shared commitment to safeguard the rights and
welfare of refugees and displaced people around the
world, had applied for membership of the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. Their diverse
experiences would enrich the work of that body.
Having designed and implemented numerous relevant
policies, they could contribute to identifying
constructive solutions to the various challenges
confronting the Office of the High Commissioner for
Refugees. Bosnia and Herzegovina and Côte d’Ivoire
had joined the original sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.67: Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
67. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
68. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Australia, Belarus, Belize, Botswana,
the Central African Republic, Colombia, Cyprus,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Iraq, Lesotho,
Liberia, the Federated States of Micronesia, Moldova,
Montenegro, Morocco, Panama, Paraguay, Romania,
Sierra Leone, the Sudan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, Turkmenistan
and Uruguay had joined the sponsors.
69. Mr. Staur (Denmark) requested that action on
draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.67 should be deferred until
a later meeting.
70. It was so decided.
Agenda item 68: Elimination of racism and racial
discrimination (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.61)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.61: Inadmissibility of
certain practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
71. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation),
introducing draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.61, said that
the international community should be concerned about
intensified activity by extremists groups, such as
neo-Nazis and skinheads, against people of a different
skin colour or religion and against immigrants. An
increase in “negrophobia”, “Islamophobia”,
“Arabophobia” and various forms of extremism was
observable in many parts of the world. Such practices
built on an ideology against which the United Nations
had emerged. The draft resolution was intended not to
call to account any States but to promote cooperation
and dialogue with a view to combating racism,
xenophobia and other forms of intolerance. A number
of revisions to the draft resolution, particularly in the
third preambular paragraph and paragraphs 3, 4, 8, 10
and 12, had been made with a view to better balance.
Ethiopia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Venezuela had
joined the list of sponsors.
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.66)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.66: Report of the Human
Rights Council on the preparations for the Durban
Review Conference
72. Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.66, said that its aim was to
endorse the decisions contained in annex I of the
Human Rights Council report (A/62/375).
Agenda item 69: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.62)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.62: Use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and preventing the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
73. Mr. Gala López (Cuba), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the original sponsors and
Botswana, Comoros, Honduras, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Myanmar and Sri Lanka, said
that it took into account the analysis and
recommendations contained in the most recent report
on the subject (A/62/301). He drew attention to certain
provisions of the draft resolution.A/C.3/62/SR.46
11 07-59992
74. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Algeria, Benin, Bolivia, the Gambia,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the Russian Federation
had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 70: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/62/L.30)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.30: Strengthening the role
of the United Nations in enhancing the effectiveness of
the principle of periodic and genuine elections and the
promotion of democratization
75. Mr. Rees (United States of America), introducing
the draft resolution on behalf of the original sponsors
and Costa Rica, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Honduras, Israel, Japan, Mexico, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Monaco, Norway, the Republic of
Korea and Ukraine, said that free and impartial
elections were at the foundation of democratic political
systems. Full realization of human rights, and true
democracy, depended on the consent of the governed,
and credible elections embodied that consent. In order
for the democratic process to be truly legitimate,
political participation was essential, and free and fair
elections provided that legitimacy. Provision of
electoral assistance was an integral part of the
commitment of the United Nations to supporting
democratic electoral processes in its Member States,
and the draft resolution requested the United Nations to
continue to provide such assistance on a case-by-case
basis in accordance with the evolving needs of
requesting countries.
76. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Afghanistan, Albania, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Estonia, France, Germany,
Guatemala, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Moldova, Mongolia,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey and the United Kingdom had joined the
sponsors.
Agenda item 63: Advancement of women (continued)
(A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.2 and L.85)
Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.2: Eliminating rape
and other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including as instruments to achieve
political objectives
77. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
78. Mr. Hagen (United States of America)
announced that agreement had been reached to further
revise the draft resolution by incorporating the
amendments in document A/C.3/62/L.85.
79. Following that agreement, Argentina,
El Salvador, Honduras, Israel, Morocco, New Zealand,
Peru, Philippines, Switzerland and the United Republic
of Tanzania had joined the sponsors.
80. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Benin, Canada, Cape Verde, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Honduras, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius and Rwanda had also joined the
sponsors.
81. Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola) said that his
delegation withdrew the amendments in document
A/C.3/62/L.85.
82. Draft resolution A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.2, as orally
revised, was adopted without a vote.
83. Ms. Rodríguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) reaffirmed her country’s firm commitment
to the human rights of women and praised all the
efforts made to eliminate all forms of violence against
them, including sexual violence in all its
manifestations. Rape was a grave assault on the dignity
of women and on their human rights, as had been
stipulated in various instruments in international law.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would remain in
the vanguard in such matters and would continue to
play its part in securing a genuine appreciation of the
role of women, in a fair and egalitarian society that
was respectful of their rights.
84. Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) said that, when the
United States delegation had originally introduced a
draft resolution calling for the elimination of rape byA/C.3/62/SR.46
07-59992 12
Governments and armed groups, South Africa had been
one of the delegations that had felt that a more
comprehensive resolution was needed. It was pleased
that its views had been shared by many delegations,
including those in the African Group. The original draft
had appeared to concentrate on condemning rape when
perpetrated for political and military purposes only.
South Africa had felt strongly that that would have
created two categories of rape, depending on whether it
was committed by military and militia groups or by
civilians. It was for that reason that Angola, acting on
behalf of the African Group, had introduced
amendments that sought to balance the text by making
certain that there was no politicization of rape. It was
important for the General Assembly to send a strong
and non-politicized message that rape was a brutal,
despicable and violent act whether perpetrated by
civilians, the military or armed groups.
85. Mr. Hagen (United States of America) said that,
as the draft resolution made clear, rape under any
circumstances was an atrocious act, and everyone,
including but not limited to States and the United
Nations, must intensify efforts to eliminate it.
Unfortunately, there were not just two types of rape,
but many kinds of rape and sexual violence.
86. The draft resolution also made clear that rape and
other forms of sexual violence in conflict and related
situations, whether as a random act by soldiers or an
attack by government forces, rebel groups, or other
State or non-State actors, were reprehensible acts that
cried out for scrutiny and accountability. The text
originally proposed had focused on the particularly
outrageous situation in which a State condoned the use
of systematic mass rape by its own forces or surrogate
militias in order to advance their military or political
objectives. While the United States and the other
sponsors had accepted numerous additions and
changes, his delegation would have much preferred the
final wording to place stronger emphasis on the use of
rape to attain political and military objectives.
87. The United States was gratified that the draft
resolution contained a strong paragraph on impunity
and suggested concrete ways that States and other
actors could assist victims. It was also pleased that the
draft resolution still drew special attention to the
situation of rape in conflict situations and to rape and
other sexual violence committed in order to achieve
political or military objectives, and contained a number
of provisions of particular relevance to cases in which
rape was used or condoned by those in authority. The
draft resolution’s reporting requirement would identify
situations in which rape was being used to advance
political and military objectives, in order to spur the
international community to act to stop that practice.
88. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation had joined the consensus on the draft
resolution, being convinced that the issue must be dealt
with in all of its manifestations, because it was
intrinsically bound up with the development of women.
The Syrian delegation’s understanding of the fifth
preambular paragraph and of paragraph 1 (b) was that
the issue should be dealt with in accordance with the
principles and norms of international humanitarian law
and the Geneva Conventions of 1949, in cases of
armed conflict and foreign occupation.
89. Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola), speaking on
behalf of the African Group, expressed the Group’s
satisfaction at the adoption of the draft resolution
concerning a question of a great concern for the
African continent. The negotiations on the draft
resolution had sometimes been difficult, but had also
been very open and fruitful. He wished therefore to
express the Group’s appreciation to the United States
and all the sponsors for their flexibility.
90. In engaging in constructive consultations, the
African Group had always kept in mind the concerns of
all the other regional groups and was pleased to report
that most of them had been duly taken into account. All
participants had been guided by a common objective:
the condemnation of rape and other forms of sexual
violence in all their manifestations, and that common
understanding had played an important role during the
consultations, despite differences.
91. Africa had taken the lead in the condemnation of
rape by adopting, in Maputo, in July 2003, a Protocol
to the African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights
on the Rights of Women in Africa, in which African
States had undertaken to protect asylum-seeking
women, refugees, returnees and internally displaced
persons against all forms of violence, rape and other
forms of sexual exploitation, and to ensure that such
acts were considered war crimes, genocide and/or
crimes against humanity and that their perpetrators
were brought to justice before a competent criminal
jurisdiction.
92. Thus the adoption of the draft resolution was a
matter of great satisfaction.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.