United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.24
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
22 November 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-55511 (E)
*1155511*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 24th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 19 October 2011, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/66/SR.24
11-55511 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/66/87)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/66/267, A/66/322, A/66/343, A/66/361,
A/66/358, A/66/365, A/66/374 and A/66/518)
1. Mr. Shaheed (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran) said that, without prejudice to the matters he
wished to raise with the Iranian authorities, he
espoused the concerns and recommendations expressed
in the Secretary-General’s recent report (A/66/361).
With regard to methodology, while he had sought the
cooperation of the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, he had been unable to arrange a meeting with
any of its representatives until the previous day, far too
late for the purposes of the interim report (A/66/374).
It was therefore based solely on his interviews with
Iranian nationals and the written reports of several
reputable non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
2. Of the cases cited in the report, most involved
inadequate observation of the rights guaranteed under
three human rights treaties to which Iran was a party:
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights. While the legal framework of the
Islamic Republic of Iran appeared to protect certain
human rights, there were glaring deficiencies in the
implementation and enforcement of its obligations, and
some elements of its penal code and legal practice were
in contravention of the aforementioned treaties.
3. The Government was alleged to have obstructed
free and fair elections, denied freedom of expression
and assembly, deprived individuals of the right to
education and harassed and intimidated religious or
ethnic minorities, human rights defenders and civil
society and religious actors. Women, students, political
and labour activists, journalists, artists,
environmentalists and religious leaders had been
arrested and prosecuted, as well as some of their
attorneys. There were reports of multifarious deficits in
the administration of the system of justice, including
practices that amounted to torture; cruel or degrading
treatment of detainees; imposition of the death penalty
in the absence of due process and judicial safeguards;
denial of reasonable access to legal counsel and
medical treatment; widespread use of secret and public
executions; imposition of the death penalty in juvenile
cases, and application of the death penalty to cases that
did not meet the international standard for ‘most
serious’ crimes.
4. It was important to recognize positive steps taken
by the Iranian authorities, such as the recent decision
to release up to 100 prisoners, many of whom had been
arrested for their participation in the protests
surrounding the 2009 presidential elections. He had
sent a request and hoped to receive information from
the Government regarding the process and criteria
employed to grant amnesty. With respect to those
remaining in prison, he called on the authorities to
allow adequate medical access to Ayatollah Kazemeyni
Boroujerdi and also to consider his immediate release,
as well as that of all of the individuals listed in his
report.
5. The human rights record of the Islamic Republic
of Iran had come under scrutiny partially because of its
reluctance to cooperate with the United Nations human
rights system. Cooperation could only increase the
confidence of the international community and lessen
the potential for politicization. Despite unofficial
statements of a willingness to cooperate and a standing
invitation to special rapporteurs since 2002, the
Government had not responded to urgent appeals for
permission to visit from various thematic special
rapporteurs, and none had visited since 2005. The
Islamic Republic of Iran had an opportunity to show
good faith by granting the two country visits supported
by his mandate and facilitating communication with
him. It could also demonstrate constructive
engagement by how it responded to the outcome of its
2010 universal periodic review, to the issues
highlighted by various United Nations bodies and to
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Human Rights Council.
6. At such an early stage in his mandate, and
without any meaningful interaction with the
Government, he had refrained from making
recommendations or drawing substantive conclusions.
However, the General Assembly could make its own
constructive recommendations. He suggested that the
Government should consider establishing a national
human rights institution in line with the Paris
Principles, as recommended by several members of the
Human Rights Council during the country’s universalA/C.3/66/SR.24
3 11-55511
periodic report. It might also consider undergoing a
voluntary midterm review to assist it in implementing
those recommendations that it had accepted.
7. It was his hope that the mandate would facilitate
a deeper understanding of the human rights situation in
both its cultural and historical contexts and would
advance efforts to address the challenges facing the
Islamic Republic of Iran in an incremental, holistic
manner. He looked forward to cooperation with the
authorities and to dialogue with the international
community.
8. Mr. Berger (Germany) expressed concern at the
country’s worsening human rights situation,
particularly the dramatic increase in executions. He
was especially appalled by the public hanging of a
minor. Moreover, sentencing Protestant pastor Yousef
Nadarkhani to death for apostasy was a blatant
violation of freedom of religion. In addition, the
Islamic Republic of Iran continued to persecute human
rights defenders, journalists, opposition leaders and
dissidents, such as recently sentenced film director
Jafar Panahi.
9. By appointing the Special Rapporteur, the
international community had signalled that it was
keeping a close watch and would publicize violations.
The European Union had also sent a strong signal by
adding 29 Iranian human rights violators to its
sanctions list on 10 October. Germany strongly urged
the Iranian authorities to respect their obligations under
international law by allowing the Special Rapporteur to
enter the country, thereby paving the way for the
planned official visit of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
10. In his report, the Special Rapporteur had
emphasized the ongoing severe discrimination against
women, especially as it related to discriminatory laws.
He wondered how the Special Rapporteur would
address that issue when he met with the Iranian
authorities. He would also be interested in the Special
Rapporteur’s opinion on the relative impact of different
options for bringing international pressure to bear on
individual cases of human rights violations.
11. Ms. Hussain (Maldives) said that the Maldives, a
Muslim country, had benefited greatly during its
transition to democracy from its interactions with the
different human rights treaty bodies and mechanisms.
It had supported the establishment of a mandate of
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Iran, which it saw not as a reprimand but as an
opportunity for dialogue. She therefore urged the
Government to grant the Special Rapporteur’s request
to visit at the earliest opportunity. Deeply concerned by
the deteriorating human rights situation in the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Maldives called upon the
Government to fulfil its obligation to promote and
protect the basic rights of minority groups, women,
human rights activists and members of civil society
and the intelligentsia.
12. Mr. Sammis (United States of America), citing
highlights of the report, called particular attention to
the detention of political leaders, such as Mir-Hossein
Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi; and religious leaders,
such as Yousef Nadarkhani. Three political prisoners
had been executed in January alone, amid a spike in
officially announced executions. He would appreciate
the Special Reporter’s views on immediate ways in
which the international community could help to
improve the situation and provide human rights
protection for those unjustly prosecuted. He would like
to know whether the human rights advocates whom he
had consulted thought it likely that the regime would
further restrict human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
13. Ms. Tschampa (Observer for the European
Union) expressed deep concern regarding the human
rights violations detailed in the report. She would like
to know how the Special Rapporteur assessed his
prospects for visiting the Islamic Republic of Iran
before the next session of the Human Rights Council
and what priorities he had set for that visit and
afterwards. She wished to know what specific steps he
would take to support the Government’s
implementation of the accepted recommendations from
the universal periodic review and how the international
community could assist. She was particularly interested
in how he planned to approach the recommendations
on releasing political prisoners and detainees and on
improving conditions of imprisonment and detainment
to conform to international standards. She wondered if
the Islamic Republic of Iran might ratify more
international human rights treaties in the short or
medium term and, if so, which should be given priority.
Lastly, regarding the dramatic increase in executions,
she would like to know if they were reserved for the
most serious crimes, how prevalent public executions
and executions by extraordinarily cruel methods wereA/C.3/66/SR.24
11-55511 4
and how he assessed the independence of the judiciary
in such cases.
14. Ms. Freedman (United Kingdom) said that her
Government had been deeply concerned by statements
from the Iranian authorities that they would not
cooperate with the Special Rapporteur nor allow him to
visit the country in his official capacity. As part of a
country-specific mandate, the Special Rapporteur’s
visit should precede any other visits by United Nations
human rights personnel. The United Kingdom agreed
that the Special Rapporteur should focus his
engagement on the universal periodic review
recommendations, but including those rejected by the
Islamic Republic of Iran, as well as on treaty body
observations, the findings of other special procedures
and the concerns addressed by the Secretary-General in
his report. Her delegation would like to know how the
Special Rapporteur intended to convey the message
that working with him provided an opportunity to allay
the international community’s concerns. Given the
breadth of those concerns, perhaps it would be best to
narrow the initial focus to a few specific subjects, such
as access to a fair trial.
15. The United Kingdom had been closely following
the progress of a non-governmental organization bill
under which NGOs would be obliged to have their
board of directors vetted by a State supervisory
committee, and all existing NGOs would be disbanded
and required to re-register with the committee, thus
giving the Iranian Government virtual control over
civil society actors. She asked the Special Rapporteur
to discourage the Islamic Republic of Iran from
enacting such a law.
16. Mr. Robinson (Australia) said that his country
remained deeply concerned by the human rights
situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran, particularly
its use of the death penalty, its intimidation and arrest
of human rights activists, its suppression of freedom of
expression and assembly and its treatment of religious
and ethnic minorities. His delegation urged the
Government to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur; it would like to know what the
international community could do to assist him in
carrying out his mandate.
17. Ms. Boutin (Canada) called on the authorities of
the Islamic Republic of Iran to cooperate fully with the
Special Rapporteur. Her delegation was gravely
concerned by the recent significant increase in
executions, reports of the use of torture and other cruel
and unusual forms of punishment, and ongoing
restrictions on the freedoms of assembly, opinion and
expression. Noting that one’s choice of religion was a
fundamental human right, she called on the Islamic
Republic of Iran to release individuals arrested on the
basis of their faith and to end the persecution of
religious, ethnic and linguistic minorities. In view of
the upcoming parliamentary elections, she would be
interested in the Special Rapporteur’s opinion as to
what the Government should do to ensure free and fair
elections, including a free and fair candidate selection
process.
18. Mr. Wetland (Norway) saw a trend of increased
human rights abuses, paralleled by little if any progress
on opening the lines of communication with the
Government or on the content of communications. His
delegation wondered what, in the opinion of the
Special Rapporteur, might be the likelihood of real
engagement with the Islamic Republic of Iran on
substantive issues in the medium term and how he
intended to broach with the Government the serious
allegations mentioned in his report.
19. Ms. Sequensová (Czech Republic) said that her
delegation would like to know the most common
offences for which the death penalty was imposed, as
well as the domestic laws and practices the Special
Rapporteur would target first in order to improve the
situation of civil society actors. It would also
appreciate the Special Rapporteur’s view on
overcoming the Government’s consistent pattern of
non-cooperation with United Nations human rights
mechanisms.
20. Ms. Löw (Switzerland) requested the Special
Rapporteur’s opinion on possible avenues for halting
the use of the death penalty in the Islamic Republic of
Iran, as well as the repressive treatment of civil society,
the infringement of women’s rights and the oppression
of ethnic and religious minorities. She also wondered
how likely it was that he would be able to visit in 2011.
21. Ms. Cavanagh (New Zealand) expressed grave
concern with regard to continued restrictions on
freedom of religion and the recent increase in
executions, including executions of minors. Her
delegation would be interested in the Special
Rapporteur’s views as to the key drivers of that
increase and whether it constituted a long-term trend. It
would also be interested in his views on theA/C.3/66/SR.24
5 11-55511
Government’s engagement on the aforesaid concerns,
particularly with respect to judicial safeguards, access
to due process and the prosecution of minors, as well
as on how that engagement might be enhanced.
22. Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
the report was motivated by the political ambitions of
the United States of America and its European allies,
particularly the United Kingdom. The United States,
which had spared no effort to manipulate the
international community with fabricated, misleading
information, should concern itself with its own dark
human rights record, both at home and abroad in places
such as the Middle East, where it had killed millions of
innocent people. As for the United Kingdom, it would
do better to look after the human rights of its own
people.
23. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking on a point of order, requested the speaker to
refrain from baseless, irrelevant accusations.
24. Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
his remarks were very relevant. What was supposed to
have been a brief initial overview of the human rights
trends in his country had morphed into a hastily
prepared, detailed report consisting of a biased
catalogue of poorly resourced, exaggerated and
outdated accusations. The Islamic Republic of Iran had
expressed its readiness to provide the Special
Rapporteur with all of the material needed to prepare a
balanced, well-documented report for submission to
the Human Rights Council in March 2012. As a
founding member of the United Nations and a party to
the major international human rights instruments, it
had a genuine, long-term commitment to safeguarding
human rights, and it had achieved many substantiated
advances in promoting and protecting civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights. It supported
special procedures as technical, non-political
mechanisms and had extended a standing invitation to
special procedure mandate holders in 2002. Six special
rapporteurs had visited the Islamic Republic of Iran
since then, although since 2005 the two special
rapporteurs invited to visit in order attend specialized
conferences had rejected the invitation. The Islamic
Republic of Iran cooperated with the Human Rights
Council and the other treaty monitoring bodies. It had
accepted more than 120 recommendations arising from
its February 2010 universal periodic review and had
been planning to invite to two special rapporteurs in
2012.
25. In conclusion, he expressed his Government’s
expectation that, in the interests of justice and fairness,
Special Rapporteur’s draft report would be amended to
eliminate the repetitive allegations.
26. Mr. Shaheed (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran) welcomed the offer of the Iranian Government’s
full support to ensure that his report was balanced and
factually accurate. A comprehensive report should
indeed reflect the concerns of the country, and he had
sought the Government’s engagement. Being country-
specific, his mandate would allow him to achieve an
in-depth, well-rounded appreciation of the country
context. It required him to work in collaboration with
the Government, to obtain the Government’s
permission to enter the country, to submit his findings
confidentially to the Government before reporting to
the United Nations again and to correct any errors
brought to his attention. He hoped, therefore, that the
Islamic Republic of Iran would see his mandate not as
a stigma, but as an opportunity to find a way to move
forward.
27. A number of the cases in the report were
repetitive, in the sense that they addressed broadly
similar issues. As for the outdated nature of its content,
while some of the cases might be closed, they remained
very relevant.
28. In his view, the best way to promote gender
equality in the Islamic Republic of Iran was for it to
agree to accede to the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which
had been ratified by many countries, including
Organization of Islamic Cooperation members. The
best way to encourage the country to improve its
human rights record would be through the broadest
possible participation of Member States. The
Government was eager to see its views reflected in the
report, and if the focus was on documented cases, at
the end of the day it was likely to respond to the issues
raised in them. With respect to the offences for which
the death penalty was most frequently imposed, 70 per
cent were for drug-related charges and the rest for
vaguely defined charges of Moharebeh (enmity against
God) and, occasionally, for sex offences. Recently,
links to Camp Ashraf had been involved.
29. It would indeed be advantageous to focus on
specific areas, and he was keen to discuss that topic
with the Iranian authorities. Possible actions fell intoA/C.3/66/SR.24
11-55511 6
three categories: immediate responses, within the
framework of existing laws; medium-term responses,
requiring changes in the law; and longer-term
responses, involving ratification of the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
and its Optional Protocol, which provided for the
establishment of a national preventive mechanism in
keeping with the Paris Principles.
30. In closing, he recalled that he had made every
effort to reach out to the Government and to assert his
impartiality, independence, objectivity and
transparency by meeting with representatives of
countries with close ties to it. He reiterated his hope
that the Islamic Republic of Iran would see his
mandate not as a penalty but as an opportunity for
constructive dialogue.
31. Mr. Ojea Quintana (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar), introducing his
report (A/66/365), said that the Government elected in
November 2010 appeared committed to reform and had
taken steps to advance and solidify Myanmar’s
transition to democracy. Since assuming office in April
2011, the President had set encouraging priorities,
including promotion of fundamental rights and
freedoms, respect for the rule of law and establishment
of an independent and transparent judiciary, and had
recently amnestied another two hundred prisoners of
conscience. The ongoing talks between Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi and the Minister of Labour and her meeting
with the President were encouraging signs of its
willingness to engage with the political opposition,
which was essential for national reconciliation. During
two regular sessions, the new national legislature had
discussed important, sensitive issues relevant to human
rights. A labour organizations bill allowing trade
unions had been signed into law, and a bill to amend
the law on the registration of political parties would
make significant changes, including eliminating two
key clauses: one barring anyone convicted in a court of
law from joining a political party and another requiring
a political party to have contested at least three seats in
the 2010 general elections. The Government had lifted
some restrictions on the media and the Internet,
including the ban on foreign websites, and the Director
of the Press Security and Registration Division had
recently called for the elimination of press censorship.
Another bill concerning peaceful gatherings and
demonstrations would need some reworking to
conform to international standards.
32. It was necessary for Myanmar to improve the
integrity and functioning of its institutions and bodies.
There was a critical need to clarify the national
legislature’s practices, rules and procedures, including
the rules governing parliamentary immunity, and
Myanmar should seek assistance from the international
community and appropriate organizations to enhance
the legislature’s functioning and build its members’
capacity. The judiciary, which still heard cases behind
closed doors and arbitrarily revoked the licences of
lawyers defending prisoners of conscience, was neither
independent nor impartial. In addition to restoring
those licences, the Government should implement his
previous recommendations on the judiciary, which
included judicial safeguards such as public trial, and
should accept technical assistance from the
international community on judicial reform, capacity
building and training for judges and lawyers. To make
the upcoming by-elections more participatory,
inclusive and transparent, it would be necessary to
reduce the cost of registering candidates, remove
restrictions on the activities and campaigning of
parties, ensure that complaints would be addressed in a
more timely and transparent manner and guarantee
respect for the freedoms of expression, assembly and
association.
33. Ethnic and religious minorities still faced
endemic discrimination. Guaranteeing respect for the
rights of ethnic minorities was critical for national
reconciliation and Myanmar’s long-term political and
social stability. It was essential for the Government to
work with ethnic minorities to resolve long-standing,
deep-rooted concerns. Tensions in ethnic border areas
and conflict with some armed ethnic groups continued
to give rise to serious human rights violations,
including the use of landmines by both the State and
non-State armed groups. He urged Myanmar to sign the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and
on Their Destruction (the Mine Ban Treaty) and to
work with international organizations to develop a
comprehensive plan to end the use of landmines,
ensure their systematic removal and rehabilitate
victims. He also urged it to finalize an effective action
plan to halt the military’s continued recruitment of
child soldiers.A/C.3/66/SR.24
7 11-55511
34. In the interest of national reconciliation,
Myanmar should release all remaining prisoners of
conscience unconditionally before the upcoming by-
elections. Citing the allegations of torture and ill-
treatment of prisoners mentioned in the report, he
urged the Government to take immediate action to
bring conditions of detention and treatment into
compliance with international standards and to allow
the newly returned International Committee of the Red
Cross full access to prisons and prisoners. Also, in
view of the Special Rapporteur’s previous
recommendation and the President’s commitment to
the rule of law, he hoped that the Government would
set an early target date for completing the long overdue
legal reforms required to clarify vague legal provisions
used for many years to convict prisoners of conscience.
He mentioned other concerns, including the denial of
economic, social and cultural rights, particularly in the
ethnic areas; the confiscation of land by the military;
the exploitation of natural resources; forced population
transfers for demographic purposes, and development-
induced displacement.
35. The Special Rapporteur continued to receive
accusations of gross and systematic violations of
human rights. It was the responsibility of the
Government to end impunity by appointing a credible,
independent body to establish the facts and provide
effective remedies. If the Government failed or was
unable to do so, then the responsibility fell to the
international community. In that connection, he
welcomed the establishment of the Myanmar National
Human Rights Commission. To ensure that it had the
necessary independence and capacity to meet the
requirements of the Paris Principles, the Government
should seek the technical assistance of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. He hoped to
meet with the Commission during a return visit to
Myanmar and would present a preliminary assessment
of the Commission’s potential role in ensuring justice
and accountability when he reported to the Human
Rights Council in March 2012.
36. In closing, he expressed appreciation for
Myanmar’s engagement with the international
community. He was grateful for the cooperation and
flexibility shown during his August visit in preparation
for his report to the General Assembly and hoped to
have another opportunity to visit before reporting to
the Human Rights Council in 2012.
37. Mr. Kyaw (Myanmar) said that during the three
years since the Special Rapporteur’s previous report to
the General Assembly (A/63/341), he had acquired a
profound understanding of the progress made in
Myanmar. Myanmar had entered a new era of multiparty
democracy. Incompatible old norms had been replaced
by new ones, such as the Labour Organizations Act.
Members of Parliament had the right to raise queries,
make proposals and hold debates. Myanmar had been
accepted as a member of the Inter-Parliamentary
Association of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and was preparing to affiliate with
the Inter-Parliamentary Union. The new President had
set a clear goal of promoting political, economic and
social development, which included national
reconciliation. With a view to ending the decades-long
insurgencies, the Government had issued an invitation
to peace talks on 18 August 2011. He was grateful to the
Special Rapporteur for his acknowledgement of his
Government’s readiness to listen to the voice of the
people and of its ongoing efforts to address the
remaining challenges, as illustrated by its acceptance of
74 of the 190 recommendations made during its
universal periodic review.
38. On 5 September 2011, Myanmar had established
the Myanmar National Human Rights Commission,
which would investigate complaints filed by citizens
and, if justified, transmit them to the authorities
concerned for further action. The Commission was an
independent human rights body that would actively
cooperate with international and regional human rights
organizations. Myanmar was taking steps to ratify
some of the core human rights instruments, such as the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography. Since assuming
office, the President had exercised his constitutional
power to grant amnesty more than 26,000 times and
would continue to do so when appropriate.
39. Myanmar took serious note of Special
Rapporteur’s suggestions and concerns. In view of its
visible and irreversible progress towards democracy
and economic development, the time had come to end
the practice of submitting a country-specific resolution
on Myanmar.
40. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his delegation was pleased that the Special Rapporteur
had been able to visit Burma for the first time sinceA/C.3/66/SR.24
11-55511 8
2010. Despite some positive developments in the
human rights situation in Burma, the situation
remained grim.
41. Mr. Kyaw (Myanmar), speaking on a point of
order, reminded the representative of the United States
to use his country’s official name.
42. The Chair asked for the cooperation of all
representatives in using countries’ official names.
43. Mr. Sammis (United States of America)
apologized but said that he would have to continue to
use his own country’s official term. It was essential for
the Government to begin the process of reviewing its
Constitution and laws to bring them into line with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. While his
delegation was encouraged by recent Government
initiatives, including substantive dialogue with
pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi, it echoed the
Special Rapporteur’s call for the unconditional release
of all political prisoners and an end to human rights
abuses, particularly with respect to the country’s ethnic
minorities. He urged the recently created National
Human Rights Commission to investigate human rights
violations in accordance with international human
rights standards, since the sincerity, credibility and
speed of domestic efforts to investigate such violations
would inform the international community’s decisions
about how best to support accountability in Burma.
44. Mr. Kyaw (Myanmar), speaking on a point of
order, repeated his request for delegations to use his
country’s official name.
45. The Chair appealed again to all representatives
to use the official United Nations names of countries.
46. Mr. Sammis (United States of America)
requested the Special Rapporteur’s observations on
what steps should be taken in the border areas,
including with respect to accountability, as well as on
how the international community could help the
National Human Rights Commission to become a
credible, independent body.
47. Ms. Tschampa (Observer for the European
Union) said that despite encouraging recent
developments, the European Union shared the Special
Rapporteur’s concerns, especially with regard to the
ongoing detention of many prisoners of conscience,
and would once again be among the sponsors of a draft
resolution on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar. Her delegation would appreciate the Special
Rapporteur’s views on the specific areas in which the
new National Human Rights Commission might play a
role and on what measures would be required for it to
be able to do so. It also wondered what steps the
Government should take to expand and consolidate
freedom of the media and in what areas other than
judicial reform the Government should seek specific
guidance from the international community, including
thematic special rapporteurs.
48. Mr. Kodama (Japan) said that his delegation
appreciated the Government’s efforts towards national
reconciliation and democratization, as well as its
acceleration of dialogue with international partners
such as the Special Rapporteur. It was important for the
Government to follow through fully on its
commitments and for the international community to
support and assist it. Japan therefore expected that the
upcoming by-elections would be free, fair and
inclusive and that Special Rapporteur would visit the
country again before reporting to the Human Rights
Council in November, and it would continue to do its
utmost to strengthen high-level human rights dialogue
in Myanmar. His delegation would appreciate the
Special Rapporteur’s comments on any good practices
instituted or valuable lessons learned as a result of
cooperation between the Government of Myanmar and
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, as well as on what forms or areas of
cooperation could be expected in the future.
49. Ms. Boutin (Canada) welcomed the
improvements noted by the Special Rapporteur during
his visit, including the strengthening of parliamentary
operations, the expansion of freedom of the press and
the halting of potentially harmful megaprojects.
Canada was encouraged by the Government’s meetings
with pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi, whose
situation it was monitoring carefully, and welcomed the
recent release of another wave of political prisoners,
although it continued to call for the prompt,
unconditional release of the many still remaining in
detention. It was disturbed that important problems had
been left unaddressed and in some cases, such as the
ethnic situation, been allowed to worsen. It once again
urged the authorities to engage in genuine and
inclusive dialogue with ethnic groups and reiterated its
call for full investigation of human rights abuses by
Government and military personnel. Her delegation
would be interested in the Special Rapporteur’s views
on the amnesty announced earlier that month and inA/C.3/66/SR.24
9 11-55511
further details on the status of religious freedom in
Burma.
50. Mr. Frick (Liechtenstein) would like to know
what the international community could do to ensure
United Nations support for measures to provide justice,
accountability and access to the truth in Myanmar and
what steps could be taken to secure the gains already
made.
51. Ms. Salman (Malaysia) welcomed the positive
transition in Myanmar and encouraged the Government
to continue on the path of democratic reform. Her
country still held positive engagement to be the best
approach. Myanmar needed the support of the
international community for capacity development and
national reconciliation, and Malaysia stood ready to
contribute in any way it could to full national
reconciliation.
52. Mr. Kim Soo Gwon (Republic of Korea) said that
despite the Government’s many positive initiatives,
further steps were necessary. His delegation joined in
urging it to ensure that the upcoming by-elections were
more participatory, inclusive and transparent. It must
also assume its responsibility for ensuring justice and
accountability by allowing an independent, impartial
institution to investigate alleged human rights
violations, and the Republic of Korea trusted that the
Special Rapporteur would continue to engage with it
constructively in that regard. His delegation once again
joined the call for the prompt, unconditional release of
all political prisoners. As a country in transition,
Myanmar needed to accept assistance from the
international community, and the Republic of Korea
expected that the Special Rapporteur to continue to
exercise his mandate with the full cooperation of the
Government.
53. Ms. Löw (Switzerland) appreciated Myanmar’s
cooperation with the Special Rapporteur, its efforts to
undertake political and economic reform and its recent
progress on human rights and democratization. Her
delegation called on the Government to release the
remaining prisoners of conscience unconditionally and
without delay and appealed to it to take immediate
action to bring the conditions of detention and the
treatment of prisoners into line with international
norms. Switzerland was anxious to know how it could
assist the Government’s efforts to end the appalling use
of prisoners and civilians as human shields. It supported
the recommendation that the use of anti-personnel
landmines should be prohibited in all cases and that the
Government should ratify the Mine Ban Treaty. It
remained disturbed by the large number of persons
displaced by ethnic conflict and encouraged the
Government to pursue national reconciliation, which
implied ending that conflict through negotiation. Her
delegation would like to know what measures the
Special Rapporteur recommended for improving respect
for the rights of internally displaced persons, especially
their right to return in safety and dignity. It would also
like to know the best way for Switzerland or others to
encourage the Government to seek international
assistance in building capacities and providing training
for judges and lawyers.
54. Ms. Rasheed (Maldives) said that, owing to her
own country’s recent experience of shifting to a
democratic system of government, it intimately
understood the need for strong support from the
international community. It therefore urged all nations
to join with it in offering Myanmar their assistance.
The Maldives was optimistic about the human rights
situation in Myanmar. The resumption of political
activities after over half a century clearly showed a
willingness to engage in real reform and national
reconciliation. However, the Maldives was particularly
disappointed to note the deteriorating education
system, the discrimination faced by many and the
dismal conditions under which the 2010 elections had
taken place, and it fully supported the Special
Rapporteur’s recommendations on those matters. The
Maldives joined in urging the Government to release
the remaining prisoners of conscience unconditionally
and supported the Secretary-General’s call for
Myanmar to step up its efforts for reform. In that
connection, her delegation would be grateful for the
Special Rapporteur’s perspective on Myanmar’s
progress in implementing its roadmap for democracy.
55. Mr. Harber (United Kingdom) said that, as a
member of the European Union, the United Kingdom
supported the proposed General Assembly resolution
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, the
purpose of which was to identify areas for ongoing
attention and assistance and renew the Secretary-
General’s good offices mandate. Despite recent
positive developments, serious human rights issues
remained. His delegation joined with the Special
Rapporteur in calling for a concrete, time-bound plan
for the release of all political prisoners, for the
International Committee of the Red Cross to beA/C.3/66/SR.24
11-55511 10
permitted to resume full-access prison visits and for the
status of the National League for Democracy to be
resolved. It was alarmed by the re-emergence of ethnic
conflict, which could only be resolved by addressing
long-standing grievances. It hoped, therefore, that the
new National Human Rights Commission might prove
a useful mechanism for conducting a credible
investigation into past and ongoing human rights
abuses and, ultimately, achieving accountability. If it
did not, the international community must bring to
justice those responsible, including through structures
such as a commission of inquiry. The United Kingdom
would welcome the Special Rapporteur’s views on the
capacity of the National Human Rights Commission to
carry out such an investigation. It was also interested
in his recommendations on building the capacity of the
judiciary and guaranteeing access to independent
lawyers, as well as in whether he had discussed those
issues with the Government during his recent visit. In
his next report, the Special Rapporteur should focus on
the by-elections and look at how best to achieve
civilian control of the military, which was vital for
ensuring the rule of law.
56. Mr. Wetland (Norway) said that his delegation
supported the mandate of the Special Rapporteur and
appreciated his report, which it found honest, nuanced
and a good basis for further work. The Foreign
Minister of Norway had visited Myanmar two weeks
previously, and his analysis of the situation coincided
by and large with that of the Special Rapporteur.
Norway was particularly concerned about the need for
capacity building within Parliament, the judiciary and
indeed all state institutions. It strongly supported
multilateral efforts to that end and had invited
delegations from Parliament and the Ministry of the
Environment to visit Norway. His delegation would
appreciate the Special Rapporteur’s thoughts about the
policies and decisions that prevented many multilateral
institutions from assisting the Government of
Myanmar.
57. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) recalled China’s position
that human rights issues should be addressed through
constructive dialogue and cooperation, not country-
specific human rights resolutions and mechanisms.
Reminding Member States of the obligation not to
interfere in the internal affairs of Myanmar, she urged
the Special Rapporteur to adhere strictly to his
mandate; in other words, to make an objective,
balanced, impartial assessment of the situation of
human rights in Myanmar, strengthen his dialogue with
the Government, promote human rights and foster
national reconciliation.
58. China rejected the aspersions cast on it. Chinese
companies in Myanmar and elsewhere were required to
comply with the laws of each country. The hydropower
projects in question had been launched after serious
assessment and scientific examination and would
benefit the Myanmar people. Over the years, many and
varied Chinese projects in Myanmar had promoted its
economic development. China would continue to
cooperate with Myanmar on the basis of mutual respect
and benefit.
59. Mr. Srivali (Thailand) said that the recent historic
events should be viewed as critical steps in the long-
term process of democratic development. Thailand
applauded Myanmar’s very tangible efforts, as well as
its engagement with the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and its
expressed interest in cooperating with the international
community. Thailand could not stress enough the need
to recognize and further encourage the ongoing process.
There had never been a better time for the international
community to take actions to lift sanctions, increase
technical development assistance, develop human
resources and normalize the UNDP country programme
for Myanmar. As an immediate neighbour and fellow
member of the Inter-Parliamentary Association of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
Thailand stood ready to assist Myanmar in any way
needed.
60. Mr. Yudha (Indonesia) was encouraged that
Myanmar had begun to implement some of the 10-point
reform agenda. Given some Member States’ scepticism
about its long-term commitment to democratization,
Indonesia welcomed the Government’s recent
enthusiasm for reaching out to the international
community to articulate its own story. Member States
must offer the support needed to ensure that progress in
democratization and human rights could bring stability,
security and prosperity. Indonesia would continue to
make itself available, whether multilaterally within the
framework of ASEAN or at the international level, to
assist Myanmar in implementing its reform agenda.
61. Mr. Potter (Australia) said that his delegation
would welcome further information from the SpecialA/C.3/66/SR.24
11 11-55511
Rapporteur on how United Nations members could best
secure Myanmar’s reform process.
62. Mr. Luhan (Czech Republic) said that while his
country was encouraged by recent events, it remained
convinced of the need for substantial improvements.
The Myanmar army continued to mistreat civilians and
commit atrocities, despite the Government’s
prohibitions. He requested the Special Rapporteur’s
views on the prospects for change in the military and
the role the international community might play in
encouraging such change. The Czech Republic
continued to support meaningful debate on the Special
Rapporteur’s prior recommendation for the
establishment of a commission of inquiry, which it
believed would be the most effective means of
ensuring an independent, impartial and credible
investigation of human rights violations. It would be
interested in the Special Rapporteur’s opinion
regarding the willingness and capacity of the
Government to carry out such an investigation on its
own.
63. Mr. Ojea Quintana (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar) said that the
Government of Myanmar should make a categorical
decision to release all prisoners of conscience. Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, who was establishing amicable
relations with the authorities and striving to understand
the process, stood as an example of how the other
prisoners of conscience would use their freedom. The
Government should not attempt a military solution to
the decades-long conflicts in the ethnic regions. Rather
it should lay the groundwork for reconciliation and a
negotiated peace by shouldering its responsibility for
justice and accountability, in order to halt the pattern of
massive and systematic violations of basic rights. He
was committed to working to give the recently
established National Human Rights Commission the
independence required to investigate those violations.
He urged Member States to seek means of cooperating
with Myanmar to improve the judiciary and, in
coordination with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the statutes of the National Human
Rights Commission. They should also explore avenues
for helping Parliament to attain its very considerable
potential.
64. The international community must seize a
historic, one-time opportunity to support political,
social and cultural transformation in Myanmar during
its transition to democracy. As Special Rapporteur, his
function was to strive with the Government of
Myanmar towards an ultimate goal, beyond
democracy: the promotion and protection of human
rights, which was synonymous with the well-being of
the people. While all transitions to democracy were
gradual, where human rights were at stake, it was
necessary to take categorical, radical decisions
immediately, and he urged the Government to do so in
the areas that he had indicated.
65. Mr. Darusman (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea) said that the report before the
Committee (A/66/322) covered the March-December
2011 period and included his visit to Thailand, where
he had met with officials of the Thai Government,
representatives of United Nations agencies and NGOs,
academics and diplomats. He had combined
information gathered during his mission with reports,
interviews and briefing papers by NGOs, United
Nations offices and many other reliable sources.
66. According to available statistics, between January
and April 2011 close to 870 asylum-seekers from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had crossed
into Thailand, which, unlike a number of other States
in the region, consistently adhered to the principle of
non-refoulement. Human traffickers sometimes
exploited asylum-seekers, and women asylum-seekers
were often exposed to various forms of violence. He
reminded States that in addition to taking measures to
thwart traffickers or people smugglers, they needed to
ensure that asylum-seekers had easy access to
assessment procedures, protection and refugee
assistance organizations. Most Southeast Asian
countries used detention as a migration management
tool, even against refugees and asylum-seekers, in
contravention of the Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees.
67. In 2011, problems associated with total
Government control of food production and supply had
been compounded by a severe winter and a squeeze on
commercial imports and bilateral assistance.
Government rations met less than half of the daily
caloric needs of the 68 per cent of the population that
received them. Most could not afford to buy additional
food, and it was possible that rations had run out
altogether by the May-July lean season. The World
Food Programme had launched an emergency operation
to assist over 3.5 million of the most vulnerable, and
its appeal had attracted some donors, although perhapsA/C.3/66/SR.24
11-55511 12
not enough. A longer term solution to food scarcity
must combine the resumption of food and other
humanitarian assistance with urgent measures to rectify
flaws in the public distribution system and the centrally
controlled economy.
68. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was
the only country in the Asia-Pacific region that was not
on track to meet Millennium Development Goals 4, 5
and 6 on reducing child mortality, improving maternal
health and combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other
diseases. With virtually no new investment in
infrastructure since the early 1990s, it lacked the
power-generation, water, sanitation and physical
facilities required to maintain proper hospital infection
controls. Serious shortages of essential medicines and
basic medical equipment persisted. While international
humanitarian assistance was essential, the State must
also take urgent action to provide adequate nutrition
and health care to malnourished women and children
and improve maternal health care. In addition, it was
necessary to strengthen hospital and clinic logistics,
improve access to safe water and sanitation services
and encourage better hygiene practices. He wished to
emphasise that the right to water and sanitation
required them to be available, accessible, safe,
acceptable and affordable for all, without
discrimination.
69. Negotiating a ‘humanitarian space’ in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had been a
long and difficult process, and United Nations entities
and NGOs continued to face operational challenges,
especially in gaining access to various part of the
country in order to monitor delivery. Agencies
providing development aid also needed monitoring
access.
70. The Government continued to impose severe
restrictions on freedom of opinion, expression and
assembly. Criticism of the State was punishable by
incarceration, and under article 48 of the Press Act, the
State could criminalize any statement, publication or
news that was critical of it or its organs. The country
had no independent national media, and the
Government severely limited the availability of foreign
media, as well as the foreign and domestic travel of
journalists. The resulting information vacuum made it
very difficult for the international community to assess
the needs of the people. The country also remained one
of the hardest to access by e-mail, telephone or
Internet.
71. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
lacked specific legislation prohibiting all forms of
violence against women, as well as any prevention or
protection mechanisms. In a culture that expected
women to be obedient, violence against them was
pervasive in the home, workplace and community. The
State needed to conduct awareness-raising and public
education programmes, establish counselling services
for victims and adopt comprehensive measures to assist
victims and punish perpetrators, including targeted
training for law enforcement officials. The United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) should explore
the possibility of establishing a country office to assist
the authorities in preventing violence against women.
72. New satellite images of detention camps for
political prisoners showed significant growth since
2001. Among the up to 200,000 people in political
prisons, thousands were believed to have been
imprisoned by reason of guilt by association. Escapees
had reported severe abuse and mistreatment. He called
on the authorities to release all political prisoners.
Furthermore, after more than a decade without a visit
by a recognized NGO, it was time for the Government
to allow independent international organizations to
monitor prison conditions.
73. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had
denied the Special Rapporteur’s repeated requests to
visit, was behind on its treaty body reporting
obligations and had not accepted a single universal
periodic review recommendation, making it virtually
the only State not to cooperate with any human rights
mechanisms. It was the one State in which civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights were
denied on a regular basis.
74. In subsequent reports, he would focus on such
areas as family reunion, Government abduction of
foreign nationals and broader issues of accountability
for human rights violations. He continued to believe
that his mandate could make a positive contribution to
the protection of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and again extended an
open hand of cooperation to its Government. In
closing, he asked the Committee to consider what
action it wished to take on the more than twenty
reports on the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that had been submitted since the
inception of his mandate.A/C.3/66/SR.24
13 11-55511
75. Mr. Jang Il Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) strongly rejected the Special Rapporteur’s
report. His Government would never recognize the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur, who was being
used to isolate and stifle his country in the guise of
promoting and protecting human rights. Any attempt to
make use of the report to smear the dignity and
prestige of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
could not prevail against the strength of its socialist
system.
76. Mr. Potter (Australia) said that the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
was among the most appalling in the world. Australia’s
concern for the prevalence of hunger and malnutrition
there was reflected by its strong and rapid response to
international appeals. It urged the Government to
introduce more food security policies, including sound
food production and distribution measures, and to
allocate more funds to the food sector by redirecting
resources away from its military and weapons
programmes. It shared the Special Rapporteur’s
concerns about violence against women, poor water,
sanitation and health care services, extreme limitations
on freedom of speech and the welfare of political
prisoners and would welcome his views on how
Member States could better coordinate their efforts to
improve the human rights situation.
77. Mr. Kodama (Japan) expressed his delegation’s
disappointment that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea had never acted on the recommendations from
its universal periodic review. It urged the Government
to take immediate action to provide food for the
vulnerable. His delegation was heartened by the
Special Rapporteur’s expressed intent to pursue the
matter of Government abductions of foreign nationals,
which was of universal concern as a violation of basic
human rights. The issue of Japanese citizens abducted
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
remained unresolved, despite the Government’s
unfulfilled 2008 agreement to launch an investigation.
78. Mr. King (United States of America) urged the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cooperate
with the Special Rapporteur and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. He hoped that the
Government’s decision to allow the United States
special envoy to lead a food assessment delegation
there in May 2011 marked a turning point towards
future dialogue. His delegation appealed to the
Government to address the issue of the abducted
foreign nationals immediately and to end the
punishment of forcibly returned asylum-seekers and
their families. It would welcome the Special
Rapporteur’s insights into how the international
community could work to lessen such punishment and,
in general, into areas for possible constructive
collaboration.
79. Ms. Boutin (Canada) said that her Government
was deeply disturbed by the reported violations of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression, the
inequitable distribution of food and the severe
conditions found in political prison camps. It continued
to appeal to the authorities to respect the fundamental
rights of its citizens, including freedom of religion, and
to comply with its obligations under international law.
Canada was taking all possible measures to compel the
Government to cooperate with the United Nations and
all other international organizations on human rights
issues, including the imposition of further economic
sanctions with exemptions for humanitarian purposes,
and would appreciate the Special Rapporteur’s advice
on other useful actions available to Member States.
80. Ms. Tschampa (Observer for the European
Union) said that the European Union would be
presenting a draft resolution on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
address the many concerns raised in the Special
Rapporteur’s report. Her delegation would appreciate
the Special Rapporteur’s views on what actions would
be most appropriate for encouraging the Government to
ease its grip on the media, information and journalists,
as well as to cooperate with additional United Nations
and non-United Nations agencies; on what the
Government could do to ensure adequate nutrition and
health care for women and children and on whether the
universal periodic review process and the technical
expertise of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights could be useful.
81. Mr. Shin Dong-ik (Republic of Korea), noting that
asylum-seekers forcefully repatriated to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea faced harsh punishment,
once again urged all of the countries concerned to
adhere rigorously to the principle of non-refoulement.
The Republic of Korea was deeply disturbed by the
large number of political prisoners. It strongly urged the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to clarify the
fate of foreign detainees, including abductees and
Korean War prisoners, and to repatriate immediately any
still remaining. It called for effective measures to fix theA/C.3/66/SR.24
11-55511 14
flawed food production and distribution system. With
respect to the Special Rapporteur’s intention to focus on
issues of accountability, it called on the Government to
cooperate fully with the special procedure and other
United Nations mechanism, which had the requisite
independence to determine responsibility.
82. Mr. Lomax (United Kingdom) said that he would
like to know if the Special Rapporteur knew what
percentage of the population relied on the public food
distribution system for the majority of its needs, what
percentage of those needs was met by the system,
which parts of the population received priority and
how effectively the informal economy made up the
deficit. He wondered what Member States could do to
ensure that citizens of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea who qualified for refugee status
were treated in accordance with international law. He
urged the Government to seek technical cooperation to
address the issues of political prisoners, violence
against women, health care and freedom of expression.
83. Ms. Löw (Switzerland) urged the Government to
adjust its legislation to comply with the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; to create more
space for independent media; to allow free access to
the Internet; to permit journalists to move freely and to
adopt specific legislation on domestic violence against
women and girls. It should accept the Special
Rapporteur’s assistance and permit him to enter the
country.
84. Mr. Shakir (Maldives) expressed the hope that
recent bilateral talks would lead to a resumption of the
six-party talks and, ultimately, to concrete action to
improve the situation of the people in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, especially with regard to
the severe food and water crises. The Maldives
appealed to the Government to take immediate steps to
protect women and children from trafficking and
sexual exploitation and to ensure food security, clean
water and adequate health care for them. It strongly
urged the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
begin implementing the recommendations in the
reports of the Special Rapporteur and Secretary-
General immediately.
85. Ms. Sequensová (Czech Republic) said that there
had been mention in the past of establishing a
commission of inquiry to investigate crimes against
humanity in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, as well as of its possible accountability before
the International Criminal Court for crimes such as
abduction. Her delegation would like to know how
much support those ideas had garnered.
86. Mr. Darusman (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea) said that many of the questions
raised had been answered by other delegations in the
course of the meeting. However, he did wish to point
out that 68 per cent of the population of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was totally
dependent on the food distribution system. Also, when
the mandate of the Special Rapporteur had been
extended again in April 2011, he had been tasked with
expanding humanitarian space. He had therefore
concentrated on food insecurity and collaboration with
the World Food Programme and similar organizations.
He would like to continue to report regularly to the
Committee on the food situation, which should be the
primary concern of the international community. Once
food security was achieved, it would be possible to
move on to the other areas of concern mentioned in the
resolution establishing his mandate.
87. With respect to the commission of inquiry
proposed by his predecessor, he had been exploring the
legal basis of a number of alleged abductions of
foreign nationals and hoped to be able to report on his
analysis at the sixty-seventh session. Since the
establishment of the mandate in 2004, the Special
Rapporteur and the Secretary-General had issued
almost 25 reports on the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It was time
for the Committee to determine what action should be
taken on them. It would be up to the Committee to
decide if a commission of inquiry should be
established.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.