United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.25
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
7 December 2010
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-59616 (E)
*1059616*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 25th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 21 October 2010, at 3 p.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/65/SR.25
10-59616 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.21: Rights of the child
1. Ms. Ortigosa (Uruguay), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.21 on the rights of the child, said
that, as in previous years, the text considered a number
of issues relating to child rights, including education,
health and nutrition, paying particular attention to the
special needs of children. The draft resolution also
dealt with the needs of specific groups, such as
children in armed-conflict zones. Armenia, Croatia,
Iceland, Monaco, Montenegro and Serbia had joined
the list of sponsors.
2. The Chairperson said that Albania, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon and the Congo had also joined the list
of sponsors, and that action on the draft resolution
would be postponed to the following week.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/65/336)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/65/119, 156, 162, 171,
207, 222-224, 227 and Add.1, 254-259, 260 and
Corr.1, 261, 263, 273, 274, 280 and Corr.1, 281,
282, 284, 285, 287, 288, 310, 321, 322, 340
and 369)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/65/331, 364, 367, 368, 370 and 391)
3. Ms. Sekaggya (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights defenders) said that, over the
past year, she had met with non-governmental
organizations and human rights defenders from several
countries and many different fields, and heard direct
accounts of the situations that defenders faced during
their daily work. Her report (A/65/223) focused on the
responsibility of non-State actors for human rights
violations against defenders. Although States bore the
primary responsibility for protecting human rights
defenders, the Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of
Society to Promote and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
was addressed to all sectors of society.
4. Diverse categories of non-State actors committed
human rights abuses against defenders. The report
highlighted the types of violations that they committed
and their responsibilities, and focused on the non-State
actors most regularly accused of violating the rights of
defenders, namely armed groups, private corporations,
individuals and the media. Armed groups included
rebels, paramilitaries, mercenaries and militias, which
often attempted to stigmatize the work of human rights
defenders and legitimize campaigns of violence against
them in times of armed conflict and of peace. In such
cases, it was vital that Governments publicly
reaffirmed the importance of their work and denounced
any attempts to delegitimize it.
5. The harassment and even rape of women human
rights defenders was of particular concern. Human
rights defenders who helped victims of human rights
violations to access justice were also regularly
subjected to threats and harassment. Some attacks
committed by non-State armed groups were directly or
indirectly instigated by States by providing non-State
armed groups with weapons and/or logistical support
or by condoning their actions, explicitly or implicitly.
6. Private corporations were also responsible for
human rights violations against human rights
defenders, especially defenders whose work concerned
labour rights, the exploitation of natural resources, and
the rights of indigenous peoples and minorities. In
addition, isolated individuals harassed defenders, while
community leaders and faith-based groups were
increasingly resorting to attacks on defenders working
on issues such as gay rights and violence against
women. Lastly, the media also violated the rights of
human rights defenders, notably in relation to their
right to privacy. In some States, the press even
portrayed them as troublemakers, legitimizing attacks
against them.
7. Non-State actors had an obligation to comply
with national laws and international norms and
standards and could be held accountable for violations
of the rights of defenders that amounted to offences
under national law. Moreover, they could, and should,
play a preventive role by promoting the Declaration
and the rights and activities of human rights defenders.
Nevertheless, those obligations did not relieve the State
of its responsibility to respect, protect and ensure all
human rights, by investigating alleged violations,
prosecuting alleged perpetrators and providing
defenders with remedies and reparation.A/C.3/65/SR.25
3 10-59616
8. Ending impunity was an essential condition for
ensuring the security of defenders. The State’s
unwillingness to investigate violations committed by
non-State actors could be seen as granting them free
rein to continue attacking defenders with total
impunity. Moreover, weaknesses in the judicial system
and flaws in the legal framework had often deprived
defenders of adequate tools for obtaining justice.
National human rights institutions could play a leading
role by dealing with complaints against non-State
actors whenever States’ judicial systems were unable or
unwilling to adjudicate on alleged violations against
defenders.
9. The report sought through its recommendations to
raise awareness about the responsibility of non-State
actors to comply with the provisions of the Declaration
on human rights defenders. It was paramount that
non-State actors acknowledge the important role of
defenders in ensuring the full enjoyment of all human
rights by everyone. Finally, the initiative of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to focus the next
Human Rights Day, l0 December 2010, on human
rights defenders who acted to end discrimination
should be commended.
10. Mr. Andrade (Brazil) said that his country had
adopted several measures to protect human rights
defenders, and that State policy in that field involved
all relevant national institutions, including the security
apparatus. In that regard, Brazil welcomed the Special
Rapporteur’s emphasis on the need for States to deal
more proactively with attacks on human rights
defenders by non-State actors. Lastly, he underscored
that Brazil’s national programme to protect human
rights defenders addressed the point made by the
Special Rapporteur on upholding the honour of human
rights defenders in the face of media attacks, and
thanked Ms. Sekaggya for her willingness to
participate in an international seminar on human rights
defenders that his country would host in November
2010.
11. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) said that, although the
responsibility to protect human rights defenders fell to
States first and foremost, the 1998 Declaration on
human rights defenders was addressed to all entities in
society, including companies. He would like to know
what concrete measures all relevant actors should
undertake in order to abide by the “respect, protect and
repair” framework proposed by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on human
rights and transnational corporations and other
business enterprises.
12. He also wondered whether the Special
Rapporteur deemed necessary the establishment of a
monitoring and accountability mechanism — and if so,
what sort of mechanism — for corporations’ social
responsibility policies. The obligation to protect would
require the existence of such a mechanism to ensure
impartial investigations and prosecution of violations.
13. Ms. Kocharyan (Armenia) said that her
Government was ready to cooperate with
Ms. Sekaggya and make its limited resources available
with a view to eliminating violations against human
rights defenders and guaranteeing their effective
operation in Armenia. Her country was also looking
forward to the Special Rapporteur’s report in 2011.
14. Mr. Huth (European Union) speaking on behalf
of the European Union; the candidate countries
Croatia, Iceland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey; the stabilization and
association process countries Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; and, in addition,
Armenia, Georgia, Liechtenstein, Norway, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said that the
European Union endeavoured to go farther towards
implementing its guidelines on human rights defenders
but did not share the Special Rapporteur’s analysis of
the legal relationship between non-State actors and
international human rights law, as the principle at the
heart of the latter was that States were obliged to
provide human rights protections to individuals within
their territories. Taking note of the evolving nature of
the concept of corporate responsibility to respect
human rights, highlighted in the Special Rapporteur’s
report, he enquired about the main challenges and
priorities in States’ engagement with national and
transnational corporations, as well as into the nature of
her own engagement with them.
15. He also wondered how one might best work with
those non-State actors to halt the stigmatization of and
attacks against defenders working on such issues as
gay rights or violence against women. The European
Union expressed support for Ms. Sekaggya’s mandate,
and, in particular, for her appeal to States to publicly
affirm the value of the activities of human rights
defenders and to denounce their detractors.
16. Ms. Boutin (Canada) said that her Government
was deeply concerned by the threats, intimidation,A/C.3/65/SR.25
10-59616 4
arrests and imprisonment to which human rights
defenders were continually exposed. She would like to
know what steps the international community might
take to ensure the effective implementation of the
Declaration on human rights defenders.
17. Canada agreed with the Special Rapporteur that
in order to strengthen the international human rights
regime, measures must be adopted to promote
responsible conduct on the part of companies. She
wondered how the Special Rapporteur’s
recommendations worked alongside those of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on human
rights and transnational corporations and other
business enterprises and asked what primary
conclusions companies, which were in need of clear
guidelines in order to respect the rights of defenders,
should draw from the Special Rapporteur’s report.
18. Ms. Tvedt (Norway) said that the Special
Rapporteur’s mandate gave visibility to human rights
defenders worldwide and thus contributed to their
protection. Norway agreed that, while States bore
primary responsibility to protect defenders, it was
essential to address the accountability of non-State
actors. Her Government also welcomed the close
cooperation between the Special Rapporteur and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
human rights, transnational corporations and other
business enterprises under the “protect, respect and
remedy” framework.
19. Her delegation requested more information on
ways in which companies might include and consult
with human rights defenders, and on how national
human rights institutions might participate in that
process. Also, it would be useful to know how United
Nations peacekeeping operations might contribute to
the protection of human rights defenders. Lastly, noting
the gender focus of the Special Rapporteur’s mandate,
she asked how attacks by non-State actors on women
human rights defenders in particular might affect their
work.
20. Ms. Nemroff (United States of America),
welcoming Ms. Sekaggya’s report, said that despite the
commitments made by States to protect human rights
defenders, the latter continued to be subjected to
harassment in many countries. She would therefore be
interested to know what concrete actions could be
taken to encourage States to end the policies that
restricted the freedom of human rights defenders.
21. Ms. Freedman (United Kingdom) said that,
while her Government agreed with the Special
Rapporteur that non-State actors should be held
accountable for criminal offences under international
law States were responsible for promoting and
protecting human rights as well as for all violations
thereof.
22. She enquired whether Ms. Sekaggya had
guidance for States on measures to help create a safe
and conducive environment for human rights defenders
to work in. Noting with concern the complete lack of
such an environment in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
whose Government continued to harass, intimidate and
arbitrarily arrest human rights defenders, she called on
the Iranian authorities to cease such actions
immediately and to fulfil domestic and international
obligations to guarantee the basic human rights and
freedoms of all its people.
23. In addition, she wondered whether the Islamic
Republic of Iran had contacted the Special Rapporteur
to discuss a visit or undertaken investigations into the
torture, mistreatment or killing of human rights
defenders while in official custody, as that country had
accepted recommendations relating to those matters in
its universal periodic review before the Human Rights
Council.
24. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that it, was indeed
difficult for Member States to understand how to
induce non-State actors to ensure the human rights of
people in a given territory when it was the State that
bore primary responsibility for doing so and for
implementing the provisions of the human rights
conventions that it had ratified. He would appreciate
more information on the link between the subject of
her report and the ratification of the domestic legal
system statute of the International Criminal Court.
Lastly, he wondered whether there could be situations
in which certain actors, under the guise of doing
human rights work, were in fact involved in extraneous
activities.
25. Mr. Matjila (South Africa) said that his
delegation agreed with Ms. Sekaggya that non-State
actors also had a responsibility to respect human rights,
in addition to that borne by Governments. He asked the
Special Rapporteur what recourse human rights
defenders whose own rights had been violated by
transnational corporations might have in the event that
such corporations refused to cooperate with
proceedings aimed at holding them to account.A/C.3/65/SR.25
5 10-59616
26. Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran)
expressed regret that the interactive dialogue in the
Committee could be used by certain States to name
others selectively in pursuit of their political agenda. It
was a distortion of fact to cast doubt on the situation of
human rights defenders, including NGOs, in the
Islamic Republic of Iran. Its Government had taken
measures to safeguard their activities, and hundreds of
them were working actively for human rights. Centres
for ensuring respect for citizenship rights were located
in different ministries. The United Kingdom which did
not have a defendable human rights record, arrogated
to itself a leading global role and hid behind a finger-
pointing policy, accusing others of human rights
violations in order to deflect attention from human
rights violations under its jurisdiction.
27. Ms. Sekaggya (Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights defenders) said that,
according to the Declaration on human rights
defenders, the right and responsibility to protect human
rights extended beyond the State to include non-State
actors, although States did hold a primary
responsibility of due diligence. Her report focused on
human rights defenders and how to protect them. States
should prevent, investigate and punish violations and
provide human rights defenders with reparation.
28. On how best to engage with non-State actors, she
said that if those actors were transnational
corporations, human rights defenders should be
consulted during the impact assessment of projects.
The environment and national laws should be
examined, mechanisms for redress should exist in the
event of violations, and national human rights bodies
should be given mandates to hear complaints.
29. United Nations peacekeepers played a major role
in protecting human rights defenders and in preventing
excesses by non-State actors. In areas of conflict,
women human rights defenders had been most affected.
They had suffered sexual abuse from non-State actors
and needed protection to do their work. If not, abuse
would continue, as had occurred in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Her report gave simple
recommendations to States and transnational
corporations: namely, to act with due diligence, to
disseminate the Declaration, to incorporate it into law
and to implement the measures contained in it.
30. Mr. Bielefeldt (Special Rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief) said that his predecessor’s report in
document A/65/207 gave an overview of issues of
concern relating to the implementation of the freedom
of thought, conscience, religion or belief. The
preamble to the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights referred to the inherent dignity of all human
beings and systematically related human dignity to the
equal and inalienable rights of all. That concept of
human dignity resonated strongly in religious and
philosophical traditions across regional and cultural
boundaries. In turn, it enhanced the prospects of a
widespread, active and lasting cross-cultural promotion
and protection of human rights, including freedom of
religion or belief.
31. Because of its universal nature as a human right,
freedom of religion or belief had a broad scope of
application, protecting theistic, non-theistic and
atheistic beliefs, as well as the right not to profess any
religion or belief. In addition, protection should be
accorded to those who exercised their right to change
their religious affiliation as, in some countries, they
could be exposed to criminal prosecution or lose the
custody of their children. In other countries,
recognition of religious practice was limited to a
particular list of religions, while small communities
were sometimes stigmatized as cults. Moreover,
freedom of religion or belief could not be made
dependent on compulsory State registration of religious
groups. Nevertheless, in many countries registration
requirements were used to control and restrict its
exercise.
32. Equality constituted a cornerstone of human
rights in general; consequently, States were obliged to
combat all forms of discrimination, including
discrimination against religious minorities and gender-
based discrimination. Members of religious minorities
typically lived in situations of increased vulnerability
and frequently faced discrimination with regard to
education, employment and health care as well as
obstruction when trying to erect places of worship.
Furthermore, stereotyping often branded members of
certain religious communities as dangerous or hostile
and even as potential terrorists.
33. Gender-based discrimination had at least two
dimensions in the context of religion: women in
discriminated communities often suffered from
gender-based discrimination, while religious traditions
sometimes appeared to justify or even call for
discrimination against women. The fundamental
objective should be to protect both the positive
freedom to manifest one’s religious conviction and theA/C.3/65/SR.25
10-59616 6
negative freedom from pressure, especially from the
State, not to display religious symbols or perform
religious activities.
34. In addition, religious traditions were at times
invoked to deny or dilute the equality in the rights of
men and women. The issue had been at the centre of
heated controversies within various religious
communities, with members claiming that traditional
justifications of gender-related discrimination stemmed
from cultural contexts rather than the substance of the
religious teaching. Whatever the justification, all
practices that were contrary to women’s rights should
be condemned and combated.
35. Under international human rights law, States were
obliged not merely to respect freedom of religion or
belief but also to actively protect such freedom against
undue interference from third parties. In addition, they
should promote an atmosphere of tolerance and
appreciation of religious diversity, for instance by
encouraging interreligious dialogue as well as by
dispelling prejudices which often caused particular
harm to members of minorities. Such initiatives could
serve the purpose of conflict prevention and also have
an early warning function.
36. Unfortunately, pernicious stereotypes continued
to exist in many States, while incitement to religious
hatred frequently drew on actual or perceived religious
differences. Such factors could lead to serious human
rights abuses perpetrated in the name of religion, and
States were obliged to take appropriate action. At the
same time, any limitations on freedom of expression to
prevent incitement to religious hatred must be defined
with the utmost care so as not to affect the exercise of
freedom of expression or other human rights. Lastly,
freedom of religion or belief was vital for building a
holistic system of human rights protection, based on
due respect for the inherent dignity of all human
beings.
37. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that he agreed with the
report by Mr. Bielefeldt’s predecessor, Ms. Asma
Jahangir, that States must protect people from religious
intolerance and that the media played a key role in
combating discrimination. Nevertheless, he disagreed
on how to combat the defamation of religions and felt
that it was a question of protecting not religions
themselves but their followers. Early warning signs of
religious intolerance included stereotyping by public
figures, who sometimes cited the failure of
multiculturalism. That phenomenon had become more
widespread and he asked if Mr. Bielefeldt had any
specific advice about it.
38. Mr. Andrade (Brazil) said his country’s
Constitution enshrined freedom of religion. A new
statute of racial equality had been introduced to give
equal opportunities to the Afro-Brazilian population,
especially in the area of religion. In that spirit of
diversity, a project was under way to catalogue, restore
and protect Afro-Brazilian works of art. He also
commended the gender perspective in Ms. Jahangir’s
report.
39. Mr. Huth (European Union) said legal
protection was key to ensuring freedom of religion or
belief and asked Mr. Bielefeldt to highlight the
necessary components of that protection. He also
wondered what the main focus and challenges were of
Mr. Bielefeldt’s cooperation with the Special
Rapporteurs on the promotion and protection of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression and on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
40. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) expressed great concern
that religious convictions were often used to justify
human rights violations, in particular against women.
States must guarantee respect for human rights, without
any discrimination based on religious affiliation; they
also had a responsibility to combat hatred and
intolerance and to promote pluralism. His country
supported interreligious dialogue, including with
Muslims in Switzerland itself. He asked what steps
should be taken to handle warning signs of intolerance
and what priorities and challenges Mr. Bielefeldt
envisaged in his mandate.
41. Ms. Nemroff (United States of America) said that
cultural environments that were open to religious
freedom and pluralism fostered communal harmony
and voices of moderation. Her Government approved
of the Special Rapporteur’s focus on discrimination
against women and his call for States to establish a
strong legal framework that guaranteed the freedom of
religion. She asked what measures States could take to
eliminate harmful practices against women in the name
of religion and would also appreciate his views on
taking up the issue with the Human Rights Council’s
recently established Working Group on Discrimination
against Women in Law and Practice.A/C.3/65/SR.25
7 10-59616
42. Mr. Al Nsour (Jordan) asked for concrete
remedies and proposals to address the areas of
contention between the concepts of freedom of belief;
freedom of religion; the prohibition of incitement to
discrimination, as defined in article 20 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
and freedom of expression.
43. Ms. Boutin (Canada) said that her Government
was concerned at the deterioration of the protection of
freedom of religion around the world, as noted in the
Special Rapporteur’s report. She would appreciate
recommendations on measures that the international
community could take to reverse that trend, as well as
good examples that he had observed of measures to
promote and protect the freedom of religion.
44. Ms. Kuijpers (Denmark) affirmed that the
concept of defamation of religion did not belong in
human rights discourse and wondered if the Special
Rapporteur, like his predecessor, would be encouraging
Member States to move away from that idea. She also
wished to know what issues he would be prioritizing
during his mandate and requested specific ways in
which States could balance promoting freedom of
religion with protecting citizens from abuses
committed in the name of religion.
45. Ms. Hu Miao (China) said that her Government
stood firmly against religious intolerance and
discrimination. China was home to many religions,
which enjoyed equal status and existed in harmony.
There were about 100 million believers and 50,000
religious sites in the country. Regarding the issue of
Falun Gong, she noted that it was not a minority
religion. Falun Gong was an evil cult that exercised
psychological control over its practitioners, inciting
them to resist medical treatment and commit suicide
and assassinations. Those crimes must be punished in
accordance with the law. Efforts to eradicate Falun
Gong did not violate human rights, but instead sought
to protect those rights and maintain social order.
46. Mr. Michelsen (Norway) said that his delegation
welcomed the focus of the Special Rapporteur on the
early warning signs of discrimination and violence in
the name of religion and found the recommendations to
States and civil society helpful. His Government was
concerned by legislation in many countries that was
openly discriminatory and would lead to a lack of
religious diversity and tolerance. He would welcome
more information on early warning signs in order to
prevent discrimination and violence in the name of
religion.
47. Mr. Bielefeldt (Special Rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief) said that despite the claims of some
politicians, the notion that multiculturalism had failed
was contrary to reason. Multiculturalism was not only
a reality, it was the natural outcome of taking a human
rights approach to building society. Respect for
freedom of expression and religion led to pluralistic
societies; the notion of multiculturalism was an
appreciation of that fact. It was a concept that needed
be clarified, not abandoned. The idea of respect was a
key term in the human rights framework and should be
applied broadly, emphasizing the need for respect both
among religious groups and within religious groups.
Human beings were the ultimate rights holders, and
their diversity should be recognized through respect for
the range of beliefs expressed individually and through
community life.
48. For all the differences between freedom of
religion and freedom of expression, their
commonalities deserved analysis. Both were universal
human rights, encompassed the right to intellectual
freedom and guaranteed the possibility of exchanging
ideas. Both were also crucial to the intellectual
development of individuals and groups in society.
Article 20 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights made it clear that freedom of
expression as a human right could not cover hate
speech, incitement to hostility, discrimination or real
violence. Those were limits that needed to be drawn,
and delineating them precisely was a serious challenge
that should be approached carefully.
49. He concurred with both his predecessor and the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance that the concept of defamation often
triggered confusion and should be abandoned.
However, the serious concerns underpinning the
concept must still be taken up. An appropriate
approach would be to use the concept of incitement to
hatred, as defined in article 20 of the Covenant, to
define limits. In the service of human rights, it must
remain clear that human beings as individuals and
groups were the rights holders, not religious beliefs or
systems.
50. A strategy for the defence of women’s rights in
the context of religion required three basic elements.A/C.3/65/SR.25
10-59616 8
First, existing problems needed to be identified. In that
sense, he recommended a review of the reports of the
Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its
causes and consequences, particularly insights into
violence perpetrated in the name of culture. Second, a
clear normative stance was required. Many treaty
bodies, including the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, had affirmed that the
invocation of religion could not justify the violation of
women’s rights, thus providing a foundation for
legislative work. Third, efforts should be made to raise
awareness of the potential for change in religious
traditions. Doctrines had and would change over time,
including those on gender and discriminatory practices.
No one could predict the outcome of movements
within religions, but providing dissenters a share of
public attention could lead to improvements.
51. Regarding the question as to whether freedom of
religion or belief applied to cults, he reiterated that it
was not the business of the State to act as a guardian of
people’s conscience. The concept of freedom of
religion must be broad, as affirmed in general comment
No. 22 of the Human Rights Committee. The State was
responsible for protecting citizens from harm, which,
under the criteria of article 18, section 3, of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
could include protection from harm resulting from
religious beliefs. However, those criteria should be
applied with caution.
52. Interreligious dialogues must be inclusive in
order to reflect the real pluralism of a country. Rather
than simply providing a forum for exchange between
dominant authorities, States should offer opportunities
to minorities, dissenters and voices beyond the
confines of their own borders. Promoting a broad
understanding of subjects beyond religious issues in
such dialogues was also productive. Religion was one
of many aspects that made up complex human
identities. Experiencing differences and commonalities
in other aspects that people cherished, for example, in
common political projects, could be fruitful.
53. It was important to connect early warning signs
of violence with early actions, which could be
accomplished through human rights defenders.
Empowering people about their human rights was the
first step, as it offered those vulnerable to abuse the
possibility of speaking out about their concerns at an
early stage. Promoting the types of dialogue mentioned
earlier was also an important measure. Education
efforts should not only provide knowledge about
religions and beliefs, but include opportunities for
face-to-face interactions among diverse groups. Lastly,
anti-discrimination legislation should cover both the
public and societal spheres and should be accompanied
by appropriate mechanisms to offer redress and
monitor implementation. In that sense, the work of the
Uganda Human Rights Commission offered a good
example of effective monitoring.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.