United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.46
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
7 February 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-59976 (E)
1159976
Third Committee
Summary record of the 46th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 18 November 2011, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 27: Social development including questions relating to the world social
situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 66: Rights of indigenous peoples (continued)
(a) Rights of indigenous peoples (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights: Human rights
questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(b) Promotion and protection of human rights: Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/66/SR.46
11-59976 2
The meeting was called to order at 10:15 a.m.
Agenda item 27: Social development including
questions relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.8/Rev.1: Promoting social
integration through social inclusion
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Román-Morey (Peru) said that the draft
resolution recognized the obligation of the State to
promote policies of social inclusion directed toward
creating a society for all based on respect for human
rights, equality, access to basic services and promotion
of individual participation.
3. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Finland, India, Italy,
Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Mali, Mauritania, Montenegro,
Morocco, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea,
Romania, Senegal, Slovenia, Suriname, the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the Netherlands and
Tunisia had joined the sponsors.
4. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.8/Rev.1 was adopted.
5. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his delegation wished to express reservations about the
fourteenth preambular paragraph, which it felt was not
germane to the subject of the draft resolution. Progress
toward social inclusion was driven primarily by
policies and practices; market access and debt relief
were important issues but were not pertinent to the
issue at stake. The draft resolution would benefit from
a more focused approach to issues more directly
connected with social inclusion.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.20/Rev.1 Women and
political participation
6. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
7. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
Algeria, Belize, Egypt, Jamaica, Morocco, the
Philippines, Samoa, San Marino, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and Thailand had joined the sponsors.
8. Several changes had been made to the text during
the consultations. In the fifth preambular paragraph,
“all” was to be inserted between “supporting” and
“countries”, and “worldwide” at the end of the
paragraph deleted. In the seventh preambular
paragraph, “may” should be inserted between
“transition” and “provide”. In the eighth preambular
paragraph, “all” was to be inserted between “of” and
“human”. In the tenth preambular paragraph, the words
“and cultural” should be deleted. In the twelfth
preambular paragraph, the sixth and seventh lines
should be deleted and replaced by the phrase “and its
subsequent follow-up resolutions, as well as other
relevant United Nations resolutions”.
9. In paragraph 6, the words “in accordance with”
should be replaced by “within”; “national” was to be
inserted between “their” and “efforts”. In subparagraph
(l), “reduction of” should be substituted for “reducing”.
In paragraph 10, “the participation of women” was to
be changed to “women's participation”, and “in
democratic political activities” was to be changed to
“in political and other leadership activities”. In
paragraph 11, “throughout the United Nations system”
was to be deleted; the phrase “in all phases of the
political process” should be added after
“participation”; and “including on the participation of
women in times of political transition” should be
changed to “including in times of political changes and
reform.” In paragraph 12, “inter alia”, should be added
after “focus”.
10. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Central African Republic, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Germany,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique,
Namibia, Niger, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Senegal, Suriname, Tajikistan,
Timor-Leste, Uganda, Uruguay, Vanuatu and Zambia
had joined the sponsors.
11. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation had participated actively in informal
discussions of the draft resolution, out of its firm beliefA/C.3/66/SR.46
3 11-59976
in the importance of granting priority to women’s
advancement. The participation of Syrian women in all
areas of life was on the rise. Women had been granted
the vote in the early 20th century, and their progress
had culminated in the recognition and enshrinement of
full equality in the Syrian constitution. Women had
held the post of Vice-President and were increasingly
represented in other high-level posts.
12. Her delegation expressed disappointment and
deep concern at the lack of cooperation on the part of
the main sponsors in addressing the concerns of a
number of delegations including her own, with the
pretext that the text was drafted according to the
wishes of the sponsors, as if the resolution was to be
implemented only by those countries. The paragraphs
that referred to a so-called “political transition” were
of particular concern. Member States could hardly
demand agreement on a term that had not been
formally defined, something that the facilitators had
themselves acknowledged throughout consultations.
Her delegation was particularly surprised that those
delegations had agreed on the notion of so-called
constructive ambiguity, which further obscured the
term.
13. Her delegation refused to enter into semantic
mazes and ill-defined terms, which it would not accept
as it appeared in the text or in any subsequent draft
resolutions implying consensus. She hoped that, in
future, the facilitator would address the concerns of all
delegations on an equal footing.
14. Ms. Farngalo (Liberia) said that her country
attached great importance to the advancement and
empowerment of women and strengthening the
leadership role of women in politics. The participation
of women in peace processes and post-conflict
reconstruction and development was crucial to the
sustainability of peace and security. During Liberia’s
political transition, the women had made an effective
contribution to peace negotiation and mediation and
peacebuilding and in bringing about an end to 14 years
of brutality and unwarranted suffering. Accelerated
enhancement of women’s political participation and
engagement was needed, and her delegation recognized
the draft resolution as an engine toward that end; it
therefore encouraged Member States to adopt the draft
resolution.
15. Ms. Rasheed (Maldives) said that her
Government placed great emphasis on women’s rights
and the political transition process, and supported
political participation by women in all areas and
particularly during transitions. It was pleased with the
proposed text, and appreciated the flexibility shown by
the facilitator and the sponsors in their effort to
accommodate the concerns of all the delegations. Her
country would have preferred retention of the stronger
references to democracy and political transition that
had ultimately been removed in the spirit of
compromise and agreement.
16. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.20/Rev.1 was adopted
as orally revised.
17. Mr. Ferami (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
his delegation had joined the consensus out of a belief
that participation by women in the political process
should be viewed not as a privilege but as an obligation
of the Government to ensure equality and equal
opportunity. His country had achieved very good
progress with regard to participation by women in the
political process, and his delegation therefore
subscribed to the spirit and objectives of the resolution.
18. His delegation wished, however, to record its
dissatisfaction with the undiplomatic, arrogant, and
impudent manner in which the informal consultations
had been conducted. It was the sovereign right of
countries to align themselves with any country or any
position they deemed more suitable for their national
interests.
19. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that her
delegation had joined the consensus because of its
commitment to political participation by women and
the promotion of women’s rights in all societies and
under all circumstances. However, it wished to record
its concern at the inclusion in the text of the phrase
“states in political transition”, a phrase which lacked a
universally agreed meaning. It also regretted that such
an important issue had been included in a resolution
where it was foreign to the main subject. The defence
of the political participation of women in all
circumstances was a priority for the Organisation, and
should not be used to promote specific interests that
distorted its purpose.
20. Ms. Calcinari Van Der Velde (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) said that her delegation had
joined the consensus, inasmuch as political
participation by women and gender equality were
Government policies. Given the importance that her
delegation attached to the draft resolution, however, itA/C.3/66/SR.46
11-59976 4
regretted the arbitrariness displayed by the principal
sponsor and the co-sponsors during the negotiations,
undermining the main purpose of the draft resolution
through the incorporation of imprecise terminology,
specifically the repeated references to “political
transition”. Her delegation had reservations on the use
of that term throughout the text. It also expressed its
dissatisfaction that the concerns and critical positions
of all delegations had not been taken into account.
21. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that his country
welcomed the draft resolution for its contribution to the
goal of promoting broader political participation by
women. Women had held a variety of leadership
positions in his country, including prime minister. It
therefore supported the aims and objectives of the draft
resolution and had joined the consensus. However, in
the view of his delegation, the draft resolution should
have addressed the issues in a broader format without
bringing in controversial and undefined concepts such
as “situations of political transition”, which
unnecessarily created controversy. It would also have
been appropriate to situate activities in the context of
political participation rather than in the general context
of human rights. His delegation regretted that its
constructive proposals had not been accommodated by
the sponsors, but nevertheless looked forward to
concerted action by all Member States to promote
political participation by women at all levels and in all
fields.
22. Ms. Medal (Nicaragua) said that in view of her
country’s promotion of participation by women in
social and political areas her delegation had supported
the draft resolution, but it wished to place on record its
regret at the way in which consensus had been reached,
and the neglect of the concerns of certain delegations.
23. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
his country attached great importance to equality
between men and women and considered the
participation of women in political life to be very
important. It had therefore joined the consensus on the
draft resolution. However, the focus on the issue of
participation by women in political life in States
undergoing political transition created imbalance and
constituted a distraction from the main issue, the
enhancement of participation by women everywhere
irrespective of political, social and economic
conditions.
24. With respect to the reference to the working
group studying discrimination against women in
legislation, his delegation noted that the activities of
any special procedure needed to be in strict compliance
with its mandate, and that any expansion of
competencies or functions required the introduction of
relevant amendments in resolutions. His delegation
considered it inadmissible for that mechanism to be
bypassed and for the interpretation of the working
group’s mandate to be expanded to give it the
additional function of looking at the participation of
women in political life, particularly in the context of
implementation of the resolution at issue.
Agenda item 66: Rights of indigenous peoples
(continued)
(a) Rights of indigenous peoples (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.26/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.26/Rev.1: Rights of
indigenous peoples
25. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee),
referring to the programme budget implications of
paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, said that, should the
draft resolution be adopted by the General Assembly, it
was envisaged that the high-level event to be held
during the eleventh session of the Forum to
commemorate the fifth anniversary of the adoption of
the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, to be held from 7 to 18 May 2012,
would comprise one meeting requiring interpretation
into all six official languages, with additional
requirements of $18,000 for interpretation and other
meeting support services. Nevertheless, those
additional requirements would be absorbed within the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-
2013.
26. As for the words “within existing resources” in
the same paragraph, he drew attention to the provisions
of section IV of General Assembly resolution 45/248 B
of 21 December 1990 and subsequent resolutions, the
most recent of which was resolution 64/243 of
24 December 2009.
27. Should the draft resolution be adopted, no
additional programme budget implications would arise
for the biennium 2012-2013.
28. Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
said that Austria, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Germany,A/C.3/66/SR.46
5 11-59976
Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Liberia, New Zealand, Poland,
Slovenia, Spain and the United States of America had
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. During the
negotiations on the draft resolution, States parties and
indigenous peoples had shown great interest in the
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples to be held in
2014. He urged all delegations to participate actively in
the negotiations on the modalities which would soon
begin. Lastly, he drew attention to a minor editorial
correction to paragraph 1 of the draft resolution. He
asked the Secretariat to correct paragraph 1 of the draft
resolution by deleting “as well as his most recent
report”.
29. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Armenia, Belarus, the Central African Republic,
Chile, the Congo, Costa Rica and Côte d’Ivoire had
joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
30. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his Government had made a priority of strengthening
government-to-government relationships with federally
recognized tribes and working jointly to address issues
facing Native Americans. It looked forward to working
with the international community to turn the
aspirations of the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples into reality.
31. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.26/Rev.1 was
adopted.
32. Ms. Boutin (Canada) said that her Government
was pleased to have joined consensus on the draft
resolution. The Declaration was not legally binding and
did not reflect customary international law nor change
Canadian laws. For that reason, her Government
continued to have reservations particularly on the
eighth preambular paragraph and paragraph 4 of the
draft resolution. Canada reaffirmed its commitment to
building on a positive and productive relationship with
First Nations, Inuits and Métis people to improve the
well-being of Aboriginal Canadians based on a shared
history, respect and desire to move forward together.
33. Mr. Preston (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland) said that his delegation was
pleased to have joined consensus on the draft
resolution, and was fully committed to promoting and
protecting human rights for all individuals, including
indigenous people, without discrimination. His
Government continued to work overseas and through
multilateral institutions to improve the situation of
indigenous people internationally, and had provided
political and financial support to the economic, social
and political development of indigenous peoples
around the world and would continue to do so.
34. It fully recognized that indigenous individuals
were entitled to the full protection of their human
rights and fundamental freedoms in international law,
on an equal basis with all other individuals. Since
equality and universality were the fundamental
principles underpinning human rights, it was
unacceptable that some groups in society should
benefit from human rights not available to others. With
the exception of the right of self-determination, it thus
did not accept the concept of collective human rights in
international law. It was important to ensure that
individuals within groups were not left vulnerable or
unprotected by allowing the rights of the group to
supersede the human rights of the individual.
Nevertheless, his Government recognized that the
Governments of many States with indigenous
populations had granted them various collective rights,
which strengthened the political and economic position
of and protection for the rights of indigenous peoples
in those States.
35. His Government thus understood any
internationally agreed reference to the rights of
indigenous peoples, including in the Declaration, to
refer to those rights bestowed at the national level by
Governments to indigenous peoples and according to
its stated position on human rights and collective
rights.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b)Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.32,
A/C.3/66/L.37, A/C.3/66/L.43/Rev.1,
A/C.3/66/L.71 and A/C.3/66/L.45/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.32: Enhancement of
international cooperation in the field of human rights
36. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
37. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that
China and Paraguay had joined the sponsors.
38. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.32 was adopted.A/C.3/66/SR.46
11-59976 6
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.37: Strengthening United
Nations action in the field of human rights through the
promotion of international cooperation and the
importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and
objectivity
39. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
40. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that
consultations and bilateral meetings on the draft
resolution had resulted in an oral amendment to delete
the entire seventh preambular paragraph, and to delete
the word “further” from the eight preambular
paragraph. Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Lesotho, Liberia, Malaysia, Pakistan,
Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic had joined the
sponsors of the draft resolution.
41. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Cape Verde, Colombia, Honduras, Nigeria, and
Swaziland had also joined the sponsors.
42. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.37, as orally revised,
was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.43/Rev.1: Strengthening the
role of the United Nations in enhancing periodic and
genuine elections and the promotion of democratization
43. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
44. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Central African Republic,
Georgia, Indonesia, Libya, the Philippines, Thailand,
Tunisia and Ukraine had joined the sponsors. The text
reaffirmed that democracy was a universal value based
on the freely expressed will of the people to determine
their own political, economic, social and cultural
systems and their full participation in all aspects of
their lives. It included new elements recognizing the
importance of fair, periodic, and genuine elections,
including in new democracies and countries
undergoing democratization, in order to empower
citizens to express their will and promote successful
transition to sustainable democracies.
45. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Mali, Mauritania and
Timor-Leste had joined the sponsors.
46. The Chair called the attention of the Committee
to draft amendment A/C.3/66/L.71 to draft resolution
A/C.3/L.43/Rev.1. He had been informed that the
amendment contained no programme budget
implications.
47. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
the issues raised in draft resolution L.43/Rev.1 were
extremely important for strengthening democratic
institutions in the Member States. However, the
sponsors of the draft resolution had not been prepared
to incorporate two key elements, which his delegation
had placed in an amendment contained in document
A/C.3/66/L.71.
48. Paragraph 1 of the amendment reflected his
delegation’s conviction that States bore the primary
responsibility for organizing and holding elections and
that the United Nations should provide assistance only
at the request of national Governments and maintain
neutrality and impartiality. Also, United Nations
observer missions should issue an assessment
regarding the outcome of an election only when they
had a mandate to do so and only after an announcement
of the results of such election by the competent
national authority of the relevant State. To act
otherwise could undermine the fragile process of
building democratic institutions or even provoke armed
conflict, particularly in situations where the United
Nations was assisting post-conflict recovery or
peacebuilding.
49. Paragraph 2 of the amendment reflected his
delegation’s wish, as expressed at the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly, to remove the
reference to the Declaration of Principles for
International Election Observation and the Code of
Conduct for International Election Observers, which
had not been developed as part of an intergovernmental
process, but by representatives of civil society. His
delegation was opposed in principle to the attempt to
legitimize, by a General Assembly resolution, a
document developed by a group of non-governmental
organizations when that document had not been
discussed at the intergovernmental level. His
delegation fully supported the aim of harmonizing the
methods and standards used in international election
observation as expressed in the first part of paragraph 9
of the draft resolution.
50. His delegation believed that the above
amendment would make the draft resolution moreA/C.3/66/SR.46
7 11-59976
balanced. If the amendment was unacceptable to the
sponsors of the draft resolution, he asked the
Committee to vote separately on the two paragraphs
contained in the amendment. Belarus, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Nicaragua, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the
sponsors of the amendment.
51. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his country did not agree to the amendment, and was
amenable to the suggestion that the two amending
paragraphs should be voted on separately.
52. Mr. Selim (Egypt) asked for clarification
concerning the rule under which the vote was taking
place.
53. The Chair said that it was taking place under
Rule 130, of the Rules of Procedure of the General
Assembly.
54. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his delegation would vote against the amendment to
paragraph 3 and in favour of retaining the current text.
The United States had facilitated open and transparent
negotiations, and had included many amendments to
the text, including many suggested by the Russian
delegation. Regrettably, the Russian delegation had
chosen to propose amendments to two paragraphs, thus
forcing a vote on the draft resolution. The issue raised
concerning paragraph 3 was outside the scope of a
Third Committee resolution. The proposal was clearly
the outcome of Russian dissatisfaction with the
election certification in Côte d’Ivoire. The appropriate
place for the Russian delegation to address their
concerns with that mandate, was in the United Nations
Security Council. His delegation hoped that the
integrity of the text as a human rights resolution aimed
at ensuring support requested by countries for the
conduct of free and fair elections would be preserved.
55. Mr. Selim (Egypt), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that Egypt attached great
importance to the draft resolution, which it had
supported in the past and would continue to support.
Egypt recognized the important role of the United
Nations in providing technical assistance to
Governments. That role had to be carried out in an
objective, impartial, neutral, and independent manner,
and with full respect for the principle of national
ownership of the election process, including the
announcement of the outcome by the national
authorities. His country would therefore vote in favour
of the amendment to paragraph 3.
56. A recorded vote was taken on the amendment
proposed by the Russian Federation contained in
paragraph 1 of A/C.3/66/L.71.
In favour:
Algeria, Armenia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, China,
Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Lesotho, Malaysia, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South
Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Bahamas, Barbados, Benin, Burkina Faso,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana,
Grenada, India, Jamaica, Kenya, Lebanon, Libya,
Mongolia, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, SaintA/C.3/66/SR.46
11-59976 8
Lucia, Samoa, Senegal, Serbia, Sri Lanka,
Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania.
57. The proposed amendment contained in paragraph
1 of A/C.3/66/L.71 was rejected by 75 votes to 55, with
26 abstentions.
58. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his delegation would vote against the amendment to
paragraph 9 and in favour of retaining the current text.
The Russian delegation was seeking in the proposal, to
delete consensus language that had been agreed on and
principles that had been endorsed by the African
Union, the European Commission and the Organization
of American States, among other organisations.
59. Mr. Selim (Egypt), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that Egypt recognized that
international observation was one of many factors
contributing to fair, transparent, and genuine national
elections, while also recognizing that regulating the
process was within the competence of each Member
State and had to be conducted in accordance with the
State’s national legislation and regulations, and in full
cooperation with the non-governmental organisation
observers. Egypt respected its obligations under
documents that had been negotiated and adopted, with
its participation, within the United Nations or other
regional intergovernmental organizations of which it
was a member. It was not bound by documents
negotiated and/or adopted outside a comprehensive
intergovernmental framework that had not adopted by
the Heads of State and Government of the African
Union, a situation that applied in the case of the
Declaration of Principles. Egypt would therefore vote
in favour of the amendment.
60. A recorded vote was taken on the amendment
proposed by the Russian Federation contained in
paragraph 2 of A/C.3/66/L.71.
In favour:
Algeria, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Cameroon, China, Congo, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Malaysia, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Grenada, India,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lebanon, Libya,
Mongolia, Nepal, Niger, Oman, Qatar, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania.
61. The amendment proposed by the Russian
Federation contained in paragraph 2 of A/C.3/66/L.71
was rejected by 88 votes to 29, with 32 abstentions.
62. Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia), speaking in
explanation of vote, said that his delegation greatly
appreciated the initiative of the United States
delegation and its collaborative work with other
delegations. His country believed that the electoral
assistance provided by the United Nations should
continue to be carried out in an objective, impartial,
neutral, and independent manner, and took note of the
efforts made to harmonize the regulations and
standards set forth in the Declaration of Principles for
International Election Observation and the Code ofA/C.3/66/SR.46
9 11-59976
Conduct for International Election Observers.
However, it was concerned at the absence of any
intergovernmental involvement in the process leading
up to the introduction of the Declaration and the Code.
The United Nations must refrain from making any
statement on the outcome of any election process
before the official results had been announced by the
national authorities. The amending paragraphs
proposed by the Russian Federation would have
strengthened the resolution, and his delegation had
therefore voted in favour.
63. Draft resolution L.43/Rev.1 as a whole was
adopted.
64. Mr. Butt (Pakistan), speaking in explanation of
vote, said that his country considered the holding of
periodic general elections to be an important element
of the democratization process. While it was the
responsibility of each State to ensure free and fair
elections, the United Nations could provide valuable
technical assistance to Member States when requested,
and Pakistan was actively engaged with the United
Nations in that regard. Such electoral assistance must
be carried out in an objective, impartial, and neutral
manner. International observation was also important
for the promotion of free and fair elections. However,
his delegation was not comfortable with the reference
in paragraph 9 to the Declaration of Principles for
International Election Observation, which contained
controversial language and was not an
intergovernmental document. His country had therefore
supported the amending paragraphs proposed in
A/C.3/66/L.71, which strengthened the text. It
nevertheless agreed with the overall direction and
substance of the resolution, and therefore supported the
text as of the draft resolution a whole.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.45/Rev.1: Protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons
65. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
66. Ms. Merchant (Norway) said that Albania,
Bulgaria, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, France, Japan,
Liberia, Lithuania, Portugal, Rwanda, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Thailand, Uganda, Ukraine and United States
of America had joined the sponsors.
67. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Costa Rica, Ecuador, Estonia, Honduras, Malta,
Mexico, San Marino, Serbia, Switzerland, Timor-Leste
and Uruguay had also joined the sponsors.
68. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.45/Rev.1 was adopted.
69. Ms. Grabianowska (Poland), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that the European Union
was a strong advocate of the human rights of and a
major provider of assistance to internally displaced
persons. It strongly supported the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons including the mainstreaming of their
human rights into all parts of the United Nations
system and their protection and assistance in peace,
reintegration and rehabilitation processes. The
European Union understood that all the United Nations
resolutions referred to in paragraph 8 of the draft
resolution just adopted comprised both General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions consistent
with previous General Assembly resolutions on that
topic.
The meeting rose at 12:05 p.m.