United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.45
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
7 February 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-59354 (E)
*1159354*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 45th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 17 November 2011, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 107: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued)A/C.3/66/SR.45
11-59354 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
(continued) (A/C.3/66/L.6/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.6/Rev.1: Tenth anniversary
of the International Year of Volunteers
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Kodama (Japan), speaking also on behalf of
Brazil, announced editorial corrections to the draft
resolution and said that Belgium, Greece, Italy,
Malaysia, Mexico, Paraguay, Portugal, Samoa and
Thailand had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
3. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Andorra, Azerbaijan, the Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ecuador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia, Jamaica, Kenya,
Lebanon, Lithuania, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, the Niger,
Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, South
Africa, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Vanuatu and Yemen had also joined the
sponsors of the draft resolution.
4. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.6/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.65)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.65: United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training
5. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
6. Mr. Zelioli (Italy), speaking on behalf of the
Platform for Human Rights Education and Training,
which also included Costa Rica, Morocco, the
Philippines, Senegal, Slovenia and Switzerland, said
that Burundi, the Congo, France, Iceland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Nicaragua and
Thailand had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
7. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Côte
d’Ivoire, Egypt, Estonia, Georgia, Guinea Bissau,
India, Latvia, Mali, the Niger, Nigeria, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uruguay
had also joined the sponsors.
8. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.65 was adopted.
9. Ms. Freedman (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland) said that, while her Government
acknowledged the importance of human rights
education and training for citizens, which it would
continue to promote in the future, there was no basis in
international law for presenting such education and
training as a human right and the adoption of the draft
resolution would not change her country’s legal
position.
10. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
human rights education and training was critical in the
promotion of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and welcomed the fact that the draft
resolution helped to strengthen support and respect for
human rights educators and trainers at all levels.
11. On the matter of whether there existed under
international law a right to human rights education and
training, his Government had limited authority over
education at the national level, and thus could not
accept additional obligations that such a right would
imply. That did not affect his country’s commitment to
promoting individuals’ ability to know their human
rights. While the United States strongly believed that
education could contribute to combating discrimination
and intolerance, its participation in the consensus on
the draft resolution did not mean that human rights
education could be used to promote the suppression of
the right of freedom of expression in any way.
12. The reference in the Declaration to a right to
know, seek and receive information about all human
rights and fundamental freedoms was no more
extensive than the right to seek, receive and impart
information under article 19 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Moreover, because the
United States was not a party to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, it
was not reaffirming obligations under that instrument.A/C.3/66/SR.45
3 11-59354
Nevertheless, his Government believed that the
Declaration would be a valuable building block in the
foundation of human rights instruments promoting
knowledge of and respect for all human rights.
13. Ms. Burgess (Canada) said that the Government
of Canada was pleased to join the consensus on the
draft resolution. Although Canada did not recognize
the existence of a right to human rights education and
training, it considered such education and training as
an important aspect of the rights to education, to seek,
receive and impart information and to freedom of
opinion and expression and believed that it could best
be supported through a wide range of policies and
programmes adopted at the appropriate level of
Government. States should be free to determine how
best to promote human rights education and training
within their jurisdictions.
14. The Chair suggested that the Committee should
take note, in accordance with the annex to General
Assembly decision 55/488, of the report of the
Secretary-General on the observance of the
International Day for the Right to the Truth concerning
Gross Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of
Victims (A/66/335).
15. It was so decided.
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)
(A/C.3/66/L.60)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.60: Inadmissibility of
certain practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
16. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
17. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Côte d’Ivoire, Mauritania, the Niger, Seychelles
and Uzbekistan had joined the sponsors.
18. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) noted that
the draft resolution enjoyed the broad support of
sponsors from all over the world. In addition to those
previously cited, new sponsors included Cape Verde,
Iran, Rwanda, Sri Lanka, Syria and Lebanon.
19. Millions of innocent lives had been lost in the
Second World War, including those who had fallen
victim to theories of racial and ethnic supremacy.
Those events had constituted war crimes and crimes
against humanity, as determined by the Nuremberg
Tribunal, and to refute them now would be tantamount
to rewriting history.
20. However, an attempt was once again being made
to do so, with certain Governments expressing a
readiness to have draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.60 put to
a vote. Apart from its clear human rights significance,
the resolution paid due tribute to the memory of those
who gave their lives so that the gathered delegates
could freely assemble. Those who wished to put the
draft resolution to a vote were invoking the difficulties
inherent in defining who had fought against the
anti-Hitler coalition, even going so far as to declare
that the issue of victory in the Second World War had
no bearing on the subject of human rights. Yet the
human rights provisions in the United Nations Charter
had been written in direct response to the horrors of the
Second World War and to the heinous crimes of the
Nazi regime.
21. Increasingly, monuments to the Nazis were being
unveiled, anniversaries of emancipation from Nazi rule
were being declared days of mourning and persons
opposed to forgetting those who had struggled against
Nazism were being arrested. In certain countries, those
who had fought against the anti-Hitler coalition were
being presented as heroes and as champions of national
self-determination. That phenomenon was an example
not of political correctness, but of blatant cynicism and
blasphemy with respect to those who had freed the
world from the horrors of National Socialism. It
involved criminally punishable acts, as stipulated in
article 4 of the International Convention on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
22. Certain delegations had for several years been
attempting to intimate that racism and the spread of
racist ideas could not be fought by prohibitions and
criminal prosecutions. They argued that, if a society
was healthy and democratic, it would naturally reject
racism as alien and incompatible with its democratic
principles. Yet according to a recent report by the
Anti-Defamation League, more than 15 per cent of the
citizens of one of the world’s most democratic
countries were openly anti-Semitic. In certain segments
of the population, that figure rose to over 30 per cent,
and Nazi swastikas continued to appear on synagoguesA/C.3/66/SR.45
11-59354 4
in that country on the anniversary of the sadly
notorious Kristallnacht.
23. The sponsors of the draft resolution considered it
entirely unacceptable that those involved in the crimes
of Nazism should be glorified or that they should have
their culpability minimized, as had occurred in the case
of some former members of the SS, declared by the
Nuremberg Tribunal to be a criminal organization.
Such revisionist manifestations of contemporary
racism, discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance
were cause for profound alarm. The sponsors had
sought to fashion a text that would be balanced and
acceptable to delegations. Open consultations had been
held and a number of bilateral meetings convened, as a
result of which many additions and amendments had
been included. Conversely, there had been proposals
and commentaries which were fundamentally
unacceptable, including the notions that the issue of
victory in the Second World War was in no way related
to universal human rights standards and that the
contemporary glorification of Nazism was merely an
example of freedom of expression and association.
Twenty or 30 years earlier, when a majority of the
veterans of the Second World War had still been alive,
no one would have dared to voice similar arguments at
the United Nations. He wished to know why it had
suddenly become acceptable.
24. Adoption of the draft resolution with the broadest
possible support of Member States would contribute
enormously to efforts aimed at eliminating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance. Its
adoption was a duty not only towards those who had
founded the United Nations, but also towards the future
generations they had sought to forever free from the
horrors of war.
25. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the United Republic of Tanzania had joined the
sponsors.
26. Ms. Velichko (Belarus), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting, said that racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
continued to be a problem in the modern world, and
concerns about fascism and extremist movements were
reflected in the Interim report of the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(A/65/295). Lessons could be learned from the verdict
of the Nuremburg Tribunal and Nazism and racial
supremacy must be eradicated once and for all. It was
unacceptable to consider the use of swastikas and other
Nazi symbols as part of freedom of expression and
opinion. Fascist ideology was the basis for aggression
and hostility. The draft resolution had the practical
value of helping to foster awareness among young
people of the difference between right and wrong, and
their ability to learn from history. Her delegation
would thus vote in favour of the draft resolution.
27. Ms. Grabianowska (Poland), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
Iceland, Montenegro, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey; the stabilization and
association process countries Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; and, in addition, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Liechtenstein, Norway, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said that the
European Union remained convinced that the fight
against all manifestations of racism and xenophobia,
including neo-Nazism, must be a priority for all
Member States. Given the international community’s
responsibility towards victims of racism, past and
present, it was imperative to avoid divisive concepts or
rhetorical and selective approaches that would dilute
the significance of the issues addressed in the draft
resolution or divert resources from addressing them.
The European Union therefore regretted the lack of a
more comprehensive, inclusive dialogue with the wider
membership of the United Nations on the proposals
submitted by different delegations concerning the text
of the draft resolution. The text before the Committee
had continued to deteriorate, especially with regard to
such essential issues for the European Union as
freedom of expression, the role of civil society and the
independence of the Special Rapporteur.
28. A more objective and legally appropriate
approach with a clear focus on the human rights
perspective could provide added value to the global
fight against racism. Measures to combat
manifestations of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, while necessary,
must be in line with the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
and must not undermine human rights and fundamental
freedoms as defined by international human rights law.
The text should avoid any language that could imply
unfounded restrictions on freedom of expression.A/C.3/66/SR.45
5 11-59354
29. The main sponsors should rectify the inaccurate
citations from the judgement issued by the Nuremberg
Tribunal, as the draft resolution in its current form
implied a principle of common responsibility that the
European Union could not accept. The issue of
monuments and memorials, on which the draft
resolution placed particular emphasis, was an internal
matter for States and not relevant to the human rights
agenda. The reference in operative paragraph 9 to the
need for “increased political and legal vigilance” in
order to prevent the spread of extremist movements left
room for inappropriate interpretations, raising serious
concerns regarding the independence of the judiciary
or freedom of assembly and association. Similarly,
education should cover a multitude of racist and
totalitarian ideologies throughout history in order to
ensure a comprehensive understanding of the
complexities of racism. The draft resolution’s request
to the Special Rapporteur to focus on aspects of those
phenomena specified therein ran counter to the
principle of respecting the independence of the
mandate-holder. Lastly, the new language in operative
paragraph 26 introduced a biased assumption on civil-
society activity to combat racism.
30. For those reasons, the Member States of the
European Union would not support the draft resolution.
31. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that,
while his delegation also expressed revulsion at
attempts to glorify or otherwise promote Nazi ideology
and condemned all forms of religious intolerance or
hatred, it remained concerned that the draft resolution
failed to distinguish between actions and statements
that, while offensive, should be protected by freedom
of expression and criminal actions motivated by bias,
which should always be prohibited. The United States
of America did not consider curtailing expression to be
an appropriate or effective means of combating racism
and related intolerance. Out of its conviction that
individual freedoms of speech, expression and
association should be robustly protected, even if the
ideas expressed were full of hatred, his Government
had submitted a reservation to article 4 of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination. The best antidote to
intolerance was a combination of robust legal
protections against discrimination and hate crimes,
proactive government outreach to minority religious
groups, and the vigorous defence of both freedom of
religion and freedom of expression.
32. At the request of the delegation of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.60.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Georgia,
Hungary, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Monaco,
Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Spain,
Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Cyprus, Fiji, Finland,
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua NewA/C.3/66/SR.45
11-59354 6
Guinea, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Samoa, San Marino, Slovenia,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine, Vanuatu.
33. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.60 was adopted by
120 votes to 22, with 31 abstentions.
34. Ms. Wilson (Jamaica) said that her delegation
had voted in favour of the resolution on the
understanding that operative paragraph 18 did not
imply any restriction on access to or freedom of
information, including access to the Internet.
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination
(continued) (A/C.3/66/L.62)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.62: Use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
35. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
36. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, Angola, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
India, Iran, Lesotho, Malaysia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru,
the Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic had joined the
sponsors.
37. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Benin, Ghana, Mozambique, Senegal, South
Africa, Uganda, and the United Republic of Tanzania
had become sponsors.
38. Ms. Grabianowska (Poland), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting on behalf of the
European Union; the candidate countries Croatia,
Iceland, Montenegro, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey; the stabilization and
association process countries Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; and, in addition, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Liechtenstein, Norway, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said that the
European Union recognized the adverse impact
produced by contemporary mercenaries on the length
and nature of armed conflicts and condemned any link
between mercenaries and terrorist activities. However,
neither the Committee nor the Human Rights Council
was the proper forum for addressing mercenary
activity, as the matter should not be tackled from the
perspective of human rights or of the threat posed by
such activity to the rights of peoples to self-
determination. Moreover, it was not appropriate to
refer to private military and security companies in the
draft resolution. It would be false and misleading to
equate the employees of private military and security
companies that operated in strict compliance with
international law with mercenaries. Several branches of
international law and other instruments, such as the
Montreux Document, could provide a framework for
regulating, monitoring and setting professional
standards for the activity of such companies. In the
absence of a common understanding on important
definitions and approaches to the issue, the Member
States of the European Union would, as in previous
years, vote against the draft resolution.
39. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
the most effective way to address concerns about the
accountability of private security companies and
military contractors was through better implementation
of existing national and international laws and robust
collaborative efforts that brought together industry,
civil society and Governments to work directly on
raising standards. Examples were the Montreux
Document and the International Code of Conduct for
Private Security Service Providers.
40. At the inter-governmental Working Group
meeting in Geneva, several delegations and experts had
expressed the view that the Group should consider
alternatives to elaborating a convention. Unfortunately,
the draft resolution prejudged the ongoing work of the
Group, strayed from the original mandate of
considering the possibility of elaborating an
international regulatory framework, and supported a
poorly considered, legally binding instrument where
additional law was not presently needed.
41. Any attempt to build on the unworkable and
inappropriately broad draft convention previously
proposed by the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries would launch a time-consuming, resource-
intensive process unlikely to yield practical results.
The draft convention in its current wording would
likely prohibit military and police training programmes
provided by private companies, making it difficult for
many countries to obtain necessary training services
and hindering United Nations humanitarian and
peacekeeping efforts, many of which relied on private
contractors. It would even cover topics not
appropriately regulated in such a convention, including
information security or material support to militaries.A/C.3/66/SR.45
7 11-59354
Lastly, domestic and international efforts should be
allowed to mature so as to further distil best practices
before a decision on formal drafting of a convention
was taken. For those reasons, his delegation was
obliged to request a vote and would vote against the
draft resolution.
42. At the request of the delegation of the United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.62.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, China, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Chile, Colombia, Fiji, Mexico, Switzerland.
43. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.62 was adopted by
118 votes to 52, with 5 abstentions.
44. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that the
Argentine Republic fully supported the right to self-
determination of peoples that were still under colonial
domination or foreign occupation. The right to self-
determination should be interpreted in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and
2625 (XXV) and other relevant United Nations
resolutions.
45. The exercise of the right to self-determination
presupposed that there was an active subject in the
form of a people subject to alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation, as defined in paragraph 1
of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). Without
such a subject, there was no right to self-determination.
The Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas
had been unlawfully occupied by the United Kingdom,
which had expelled the Argentine population and
authorities in order to install its own population there.
Therefore, it was not the right to self-determination,
but rather the other important principle of
decolonization, territorial integrity, that should apply.
46. All of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Special Committee on
decolonization had highlighted the special and
particular colonial situation of the Malvinas Islands,
recognizing the existence of a sovereignty dispute
between Argentina and the United Kingdom and noting
that the way to resolve that dispute was through the
resumption of bilateral negotiations with a view to
finding a just, peaceful and lasting solution as soon as
possible, taking into account the interests of the
islanders.A/C.3/66/SR.45
11-59354 8
47. Mr. Duddy (United Kingdom) said that the United
Kingdom had no doubt concerning its sovereignty over
the Falkland Islands. The British Government attached
great importance to the principle of self-determination,
as set out in Article 1, paragraph 2, of the Charter and
article 1 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. That principle underlined his
Government’s position on the Falkland Islands. No
negotiations would be held on that subject unless and
until such time as the islanders themselves so desired.
48. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina), reiterating the
statement delivered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Argentina before the Special Committee on
decolonization on 21 June 2011, recalled that the
Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas
were an integral part of Argentine national territory and
that, being illegally occupied by the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, they were the
object of a sovereignty dispute between the two
countries. That dispute was recognized by various
international organizations and numerous General
Assembly and Special Committee resolutions, which
called on the parties to resume negotiations in order to
reach, as soon as possible, a peaceful and lasting
solution. The Argentine Republic affirmed its
legitimate sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands,
South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and
the surrounding maritime areas.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/C.3/66/L.23/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.23/Rev.1: International
Covenants on Human Rights
49. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
50. Mr. Gomez (Sweden), speaking on behalf of the
Nordic countries Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway
and Sweden, said that since the introduction of the
draft resolution, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia and
San Marino had joined the sponsors. The current
version of the draft resolution was short and procedural
and had retained only indispensable operative
paragraphs. The General Assembly’s adoption of a
resolution in support of both the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights would demonstrate the membership’s
broad support for the fundamental rights contained in
the Covenants and the strength of treating both
instruments in a single resolution.
51. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Benin, Bhutan, Ecuador, Honduras, India,
Madagascar, Paraguay, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had
joined the sponsors.
52. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of position, thanked the main
sponsors for developing a streamlined resolution that
commanded broad support and welcomed the good
work and efforts of the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and of the Human Rights
Committee. His delegation was pleased to join in that
consensus.
53. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.23/Rev.1 was adopted.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.31/Rev.1,
A/C.3/66/L.39 and A/C.3/66/L.45/Rev.1)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.31/Rev.1: The universal,
indivisible, interrelated, interdependent and mutually
reinforcing nature of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms
54. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
55. Mr. Andrade (Brazil), speaking also on behalf of
India and South Africa, said that Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cape Verde, Costa
Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Haiti,
Indonesia, Liberia, Nepal, Peru, Paraguay, Portugal,
Rwanda, Ukraine and Uruguay had joined the sponsors
of the draft resolution.
56. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Benin, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea-Bissau, the Niger, Timor-Leste, Turkey and the
United Republic of Tanzania had also joined the
sponsors.
57. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.31/Rev.1 was adopted.
58. Ms. Grabianowska (Poland), speaking on behalf
of the European Union, said that its member countriesA/C.3/66/SR.45
9 11-59354
attached the same importance to economic, social and
cultural rights as to civil and political rights. All human
rights were universal, interdependent and interrelated
and must receive the same emphasis, as under the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action. It was
unfortunate that the right to development was the only
right singled out twice in a draft resolution devoted to
the interdependence of all human rights. Moreover, the
seventh preambular paragraph should be interpreted in
the light of the principle of the primary responsibility
of States to promote and protect human rights. The
reference in that paragraph to “equal and fair
treatment” of human rights did not prejudge the
language in section I.5 of the Vienna Declaration.
59. Ms. Fontana (Switzerland) said that her
delegation had joined the consensus, but was
concerned that certain aspects of the draft resolution
might be interpreted as calling into question what had
been achieved in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action. All human rights were
interdependent and should receive equal emphasis, so
it was not clear why the draft resolution should
emphasize the right to development.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.39: Promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order
60. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
61. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria, Bangladesh, Botswana, China, the
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, Ghana, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Myanmar, Namibia, the
Niger, the Russian Federation, Senegal, Swaziland,
Viet Nam and Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution.
62. Ms. Astiasarán Arias (Cuba) said that Angola,
Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, the Congo,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Democratic
Peoples Republic of Korea, the Dominican Republic,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Malaysia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Vanuatu had also joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
63. Ms. Grabianowska (Poland), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting on behalf of the
European Union, said that it was necessary to continue
to work towards a democratic and equitable world
order, but several elements in the draft resolution went
far beyond the scope of the Committee, were cited out
of context and were not addressed in a holistic or
comprehensive way. Moreover, the establishment of a
new mandate of independent expert on the promotion
of a democratic and equitable order as set out in
Human Rights Council resolution 18/6 added no value
to the promotion and protection of human rights. The
members of the European Union would thus vote
against the draft resolution.
64. At the request of the delegation of Poland, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/66/L.39.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,A/C.3/66/SR.45
11-59354 10
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico,
Peru.
65. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.39 was adopted by
117 votes to 52, with 6 abstentions.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.45/Rev.1: Protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons
66. Ms. Merchant (Norway) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.45/Rev.1, which showed that the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement were
more robust than ever. The draft resolution contained
new elements, such as reference to the African Union
Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, and to climate
change, environmental degradation and increased risk
of natural hazards, which, in combination with other
risk factors, could be viewed as a driver of
displacement.
67. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Chile, the Czech
Republic, Ireland, Madagascar, Mali, the Niger,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, Sierra Leone, Spain, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United Republic of Tanzania had joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution.
Agenda item 107: Crime prevention and criminal
justice (continued) (A/C.3/66/L.17)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.17: United Nations African
Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders
68. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
69. Ms. Kafeero (Uganda), speaking on behalf of the
Group of African States, said that the efforts of the
United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders enhanced the
capacity of African States.
70. A number of revisions had been made to the draft
resolution. In the fourth preambular paragraph, the
words “money laundering” had been inserted after the
word “piracy”; in the fifth preambular paragraph, the
word “processes” had been added after “litigation”; the
eighth preambular paragraph had been revised to read
“Recognizing the importance of promoting sustainable
development as a complement to crime prevention
strategies”. Paragraph 5 had been revised to read
“Encourages the Institute, in cooperation with relevant
United Nations agencies, take into account the various
planning authorities in the region that focus attention
on the coordination of activities that promote
development based on sustainable agricultural
production and preservation of the environment in
developing its crime prevention strategies”. In
paragraph 11, the word “significantly” had been
replaced with “greatly”.
71. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.17, as orally revised,
was adopted.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.