United Nations A/C.3/67/SR.42
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-seventh session
Official Records
Distr.: General
27 December 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
12-59805 (E)
*1259805*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 42nd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 20 November 2012, at 3 pm.
Chair: Mr. Mac-Donald. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Suriname)
Contents
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/67/SR.42
12-59805 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Agenda item 64: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.59)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.59: Report of the Human
Rights Council
1. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.59, as orally revised
during the 41st meeting, was adopted.
2. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
Government had participated actively in the Human
Rights Council and had adopted a positive approach to
decisions in the Council’s report. It was regrettable,
however, that the report contained resolutions on the
human rights situation in her country that were based
on unilateral sources and used misleading and hateful
language. Those resolutions denounced the Syrian Arab
Republic and served to support violence and terrorism
and external intervention in Syrian affairs, while they
failed to call for an end to violence, the disarmament of
armed terrorist groups or for a return to the negotiating
table.
3. The resolution also failed to mention the
deteriorating economic and humanitarian situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic due to unilateral coercive
measures, which were in breach of the principle of
State sovereignty and independence, and a violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and human rights
principles.
4. While her delegation had joined consensus on the
draft resolution, it rejected politicized resolutions on
the situation in her country which interfered with its
internal affairs, and was not committed to their
implementation.
5. That position did not change her Government’s
steadfast and principled position in support of
recommendations in the report which addressed the
condemnation of human rights violations committed by
Israel in the occupied Syrian Golan and in Palestine, as
those were just causes that merited support from all
Member States.
6. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking on behalf
of the European Union and its Member States, said that
procedural concerns on the current initiative remained:
the Committee could consider, and, when necessary,
take action on the Human Rights Council’s
recommendations, but did not need to take note of its
resolutions in a generic manner. That undermined the
agreement on the report’s allocation to both the
General Assembly plenary and the Third Committee.
He welcomed the opportunity to listen to the views of
all delegations regarding the overall performance of the
Council.
7. Ms. Belskaya (Belarus) said that her Government
had not been able to join consensus on the Human
Rights Council’s report because it did not accurately
depict the situation in her country. It presented
politically motivated views and constituted intervention
in the internal affairs of Belarus. The increase in
activities intended to put pressure on States, in violation
of the principles of objectivity and non-discrimination,
was of concern. The use of double standards in the
context of the universal periodic review was
inadmissible; that approach had culminated in the fall of
the Commission on Human Rights. Belarus would
continue to work with the Council, its special
procedures and other States in striving to bring the
Council back on track as the main United Nations
human rights body.
8. Ms. Robl (United States of America) said that her
Government had been proud to work with other nations
to adopt draft resolutions on the most pressing country-
specific and thematic human rights issues, and had
joined the consensus. While it remained concerned
about the Council’s disproportionate focus on Israel, it
had seen significant improvements over the past year
in its ability to fulfil its mandate to promote and
protect human rights. Her Government was pleased to
have been elected to a second term on the Council.
9. Mr. Eshragh Jahromi (Islamic Republic of Iran)
said that his Government disassociated itself from the
text because the Human Rights Council report
contained resolutions and recommendations that
mainly pursued politicized objectives rather than
human rights. The adoption of country-specific
resolutions such as that on Iran would lead the Council
down the same futile path as the now-defunct
Commission on Human Rights.
10. Ms. Furman (Israel) said that her Government
had been actively involved in negotiations which had
led to the establishment of the Human Rights Council,
in order to renew public confidence in the United
Nations human rights body. The founding resolution
clearly stated that the Council’s work should be guided
by universality, impartiality and non-selectivity.
Nevertheless, agenda item 7 on Israel constitutedA/C.3/67/SR.42
3 12-59805
discrimination against a Member State, defying the
very principles on which the Council was founded, and
distorted United Nations ideals. The singling out of
Israel cast a dark shadow on the work of the United
Nations as a whole, and Human Rights Council
resolution 19/17 (2012) particularly reflected the
Council’s bias against Israel. Consequently, her
Government could not support the resolution and
disassociated itself from it.
11. Ms. Loew (Switzerland), speaking also on behalf
of Iceland, Liechtenstein, New Zealand and Norway,
said that those countries strongly supported the work of
the Human Rights Council, and recalled that it was up
to the General Assembly plenary, not the Third
Committee, to take action on the Council’s report. It
was therefore regrettable that the draft resolution,
which had no added value, disregarded that
understanding. All recommendations should be
considered, not collectively, but on the basis of
individual merits.
12. Ms. Murillo (Costa Rica) said that it was crucial
to preserve the work and decisions of the Human
Rights Council, and the Council report should be
considered in the plenary, not the Committee, in
accordance with paragraph 5(j) of General Assembly
resolution 60/251. The Committee should only
consider the recommendations in the report.
13. Ms. Semasinghe (Sri Lanka) said that her
Government had joined consensus on the draft
resolution, but had some reservations. She recalled that
the Human Rights Council should be guided by the
principles of universality, impartiality, and non-
selectivity in the promotion and protection of human
rights. There must be genuine cooperation to assist
States in complying with their obligations. That
cardinal principle, however, had been violated, thus
exacerbating country situations. Following the defeat
of terrorism in her country, her Government had
strengthened its democratic institutions and processes,
was seeking reconciliation, and was promoting human
rights through a national action plan. Sri Lanka had
engaged with the Council and its mechanisms,
including the universal periodic review, and had been
steadfast in its reporting to treaty bodies. Despite those
efforts, Council resolution 19/2 (2012) on promoting
reconciliation and accountability in Sri Lanka was ill-
conceived and set a negative precedent that challenged
the Council’s core values. In keeping with established
international procedures, domestic processes must be
exhausted before proceeding to external review.
Countries convulsed by terrorism must be given time to
restore their systems of rights and freedoms.
Collective, non-selective efforts were needed, based on
the realities in countries.
14. Ms. Burgess (Canada) said that her delegation
had joined consensus on the draft resolution, but was
concerned about the repeated presentation of the matter
in the Committee, when follow-up on the report should
take place in the General Assembly plenary. It was also
concerned about the establishment of a United Nations
fact-finding mission on Israeli settlements, a final
status issue which should be resolved by the parties
concerned in the framework of a comprehensive peace
agreement.
Agenda item 69(b): Promotion and protection of
human rights: Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/67/L.36, A/C.3/67/L.45,
A/C.3/67/L.60, A/C.3/67/L.67 and A/C.3/67/L.68)
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36: Extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions
15. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
16. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Andorra, Bosnia Herzegovina, Brazil,
Chile, Georgia, Greece, Honduras, Iceland, Mexico,
Paraguay, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Somalia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Uruguay
had joined the sponsors.
17. Mr. Mendonça (Cape Verde), speaking on a
point of order on behalf of the African Group,
requested a brief suspension of the meeting so that the
group could discuss its action on the draft resolution.
The meeting was suspended at 3.55 p.m. and resumed
at 4.10 p.m.
18. Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden), speaking on behalf of
the original sponsors representing all regions, and the
new sponsors: Armenia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Malta,
the Netherlands, the Republic of Korea, Spain, Timor
Leste, Ukraine and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, introduced draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36.
19. The aim of the draft resolution was to stress the
importance of protecting individuals fromA/C.3/67/SR.42
12-59805 4
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions as well
as to effectively investigate and bring perpetrators of
such killings to justice. It addressed two core issues:
the right to life and the fight against impunity.
20. The Chair drew attention to draft amendment
A/C.3/67/L.67 to draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36, and
noted that the amendment contained no programme
budget implications.
21. Mr. Lim (Singapore) said that Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, China, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Uganda
and Viet Nam had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
22. The proposed amendment to the draft resolution
would delete the eighth preambular paragraph, which
noted with deep concern the continuing instances of
the arbitrary deprivation of life, as a result of the
imposition and implementation of capital punishment
in a manner that violated international law.
23. His delegation rejected any association of capital
punishment to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions. The death penalty was not arbitrary but
was part of a judicial process. There was no
international consensus on capital punishment, which
was maintained in law and practice in many countries.
There was nothing arbitrary about prescribing the death
penalty for the most serious offences. Many viewed the
death penalty as an issue of law and order to be
resolved by countries in accordance with their own
national political, economic and social circumstances.
The paragraph should thus not be included in the draft
resolution.
24. The Chair said that a recorded vote had been
requested on the draft amendment contained in
A/C.3/67/L.67.
25. Mr. Elbahi (Sudan), speaking on behalf of the
Group of Arab States, said that the Group remained
fully committed to the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. However, it resented attempts to insert into
resolutions language that had not been agreed on by the
General Assembly and had no basis in international
law. There were some who would resort to any ruse to
seize on general observations made by a particular
body to reinterpret international instruments in a way
that focused disproportionately on discrimination on
the basis of sexual tendency and behaviour as opposed
to other types of discrimination. The expression
"sexual orientation or gender identity" could cover a
wide range of activities that went beyond relations
between consenting adults and might include, for
example, paedophilia.
26. International human rights instruments, and in
particular article 6 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, did not criminalize the death
penalty. Even in the draft resolution under discussion,
article 5 listed the conditions under which the death
penalty could be implemented. Consequently, the
eighth preambular paragraph, which implied that the
imposition of capital punishment was a violation of
international law, was itself a violation of international
law.
27. The Group of Arab States objected to the
politicization of civil rights questions, and to the
introduction into resolutions of language based on
subjective interpretations of international law. A
decade’s worth of attempts to insert such language into
the resolution under discussion had ended up forcing a
vote on what had formerly been a matter of consensus.
The Member States of the Arab Group would
consequently vote in favour of the two amendments.
28. Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden) said that her
delegation, on behalf of the Nordic countries, had held
four open informal consultations on the draft
resolution. During those consultations and in many
bilateral discussions, it had done its utmost to explain
and discuss the aim of the paragraph and the reasoning
behind why it was deemed important.
29. Mr. Selim (Egypt), speaking on a point of order,
asked the Secretariat to read rule 128 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
30. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) read
out rule 128.
31. Mr. Selim (Egypt) asked the Chair to confirm
whether or not the meeting was at the stage of
explanation of vote.
32. The Chair said that the Committee was at the
stage of explanation of vote before the voting, and it
was in that context that Sweden had been given the
floor.
33. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that, in accordance with
article 128 of the rules of procedure, proposers of a
proposal or of an amendment could not take the floor
to explain their vote on their own proposal, and pointedA/C.3/67/SR.42
5 12-59805
out that the Committee was at the juncture of
explanation of vote before the voting on an
amendment.
34. Mr. Zeloli (Italy), also speaking on point of
order, said that Sweden was not the proposer of the
amendment.
Statements in explanation of vote before the voting
35. Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden) said that her
delegation, on behalf of the Nordic countries, had done
its utmost to clarify, in open informal consultations and
bilaterally, that the paragraph in question was
important. That paragraph did not claim that capital
punishment per se was non-compliant with
international law, but aimed to ensure that, where
capital punishment was carried out, it was in
compliance with international law and the safeguards
guaranteeing protection of the rights of those facing the
death penalty set out under Economic and Social
Council resolution 1984/50. Instances of non-
compliance with international law in that context could
be an arbitrary deprivation of life. She thus appealed to
the Committee to vote against the proposed
amendment.
36. Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago) said that the
reference made in the paragraph in question to the
arbitrary deprivation of life was not a concern in her
country, where the death sentence was imposed only
for the most serious crimes according to law, and after
all appeals were exhausted. Nevertheless, the implicit
recognition in that paragraph that capital punishment
might be contrary to international law was
unacceptable. The juxtaposition of capital punishment
and arbitrary deprivation of life could be regarded as
an effort to delegitimize the imposition and
implementation of an act that was both lawful and a
practice sanctioned by international law. The approach
set out in that preambular paragraph was neither
constructive nor respectful of States’ sovereign right to
determine their own laws and policies, in keeping with
international obligations on the issue of capital
punishment. Her delegation would thus vote in favour
of the proposed amendment.
37. Ms. Loew (Switzerland) said that the proposed
amendment to the draft resolution was regrettable,
since it was clear that if capital punishment was not
implemented in accordance with international human
rights guidelines, then it constituted arbitrary
execution. Her delegation would thus vote against the
proposed amendment.
38. Ms. Syed (Norway) said that her delegation
would oppose the proposed amendment. The right to
life was a supreme right, without which no other right
could be enjoyed. The paragraph in question did not
claim that capital punishment per se was not in
compliance with international law. For States where the
death penalty continued to be used, stringent
requirements must be met under international law.
Norway thus called on delegations to vote against the
proposed amendment.
39. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.36,
contained in document A/C.3/67/L.67
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, China,
Congo, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,A/C.3/67/SR.42
12-59805 6
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic,
Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Fiji, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Philippines,
Senegal, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Tuvalu, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Vanuatu,
Zambia.
40. The proposed amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.36 contained in document A/C.3/67/L.67
was rejected by 78 votes to 50, with 38 abstentions.
Proposed amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/L.67/36,
contained in document A/C.3/67/L.68
41. The Chair said that the proposed amendment
contained no programme budget implications.
42. Mr. Al-Yafei (United Arab Emirates), speaking
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), introduced the proposed amendment, and
reaffirmed that all human rights were universal,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and no
country or territory could claim that all human rights
had been fully realized at all times for all. The OIC
was gravely concerned about the systematic attempts to
introduce into the United Nations certain notions that
had no legal basis in human rights instruments, and
were also concerned about the attempt to focus on
persons on the grounds of their sexual interests or
behaviours, while disregarding the fact that killings,
intolerance and discrimination regrettably existed the
world over.
43. The notion of sexual orientation and gender
identity covered a wide range of personal choices
extending well beyond individuals’ sexual interests;
that notion was not, nor should it be, linked to existing
international human rights instruments. People were
not inherently vulnerable; it was the socio-economic
setting in which they lived which made some
vulnerable.
44. Thus, vulnerable individuals and groups included
women, children, the elderly, foreign occupation
refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced
persons, migrants, persons deprived of their liberty,
individuals living in extreme poverty or persons who,
because of their nationality, ethnicity, religion or
language, became vulnerable as a result inter alia of
intolerance and discrimination against them. He called
on Member States to step up their efforts towards the
total elimination of all forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
to refrain from attempting to give priority to the rights
of certain individuals which could result in positive
discrimination at the expense of others’ rights, and thus
ran counter to the principles of non-discrimination and
equality.
45. The Chair said that a recorded vote had been
requested.
Statements in explanation of vote before the voting
46. Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden) said that, as the main
sponsor of the draft resolution, her country objected to
the proposal to delete the reference to sexual
orientation and gender identity in paragraph 6 (b).
Those words had been specifically included because
sexual orientation and gender identity had often been
the motive for extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary
executions. Their deletion would be tantamount to
looking the other way or even condoning the killing of
individuals solely on the basis of their sexual
orientation or gender identity, not to mention impunity
for the perpetrators of that crime. Member States must
fulfil their international obligations to investigate
suspected cases of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions and bring to justice those responsible
regardless of who the victim was. Denying the right to
life and disregarding the plight of persons who were
already in a vulnerable position could never be
acceptable. Sweden would therefore vote against the
proposed amendment and appealed to other delegations
to do the same.
47. Mr. Gilroy (Ireland) said that the core message
of the draft resolution as a whole and paragraph 6 (b)
in particular was that no person should be
extrajudicially, summarily or arbitrarily executed, and
that certain individuals were more likely to be the
victim of such violence. People the world over suffered
violence as a result of their sexual orientation or
gender identity, and such crimes had been repeatedlyA/C.3/67/SR.42
7 12-59805
documented by the human rights treaty bodies and the
special procedures of the Human Rights Council, as
well as by the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions. That continuing
grave situation deserved to be explicitly highlighted in
the resolution. Although there could be no hierarchy of
rights, Member States had a common duty to ensure
that the human rights of all persons were respected,
and addressing violations on the basis of the non-
exhaustive grounds mentioned in paragraph 6 (b) in no
way diminished Member States’ shared commitment to
combat violations on other grounds. Ireland would
therefore vote against the proposed amendment.
48. Ms. Cousens (United States of America) said that
her country vehemently opposed the proposed
amendment and would therefore vote against it.
Deletion of the words concerned would suggest that
persons targeted for extrajudicial killing on account of
their sexual orientation or gender identity did not enjoy
the same right to life as others. Surely no country
would condone the extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
execution of any individual on that basis. That basic
right to life was at stake, and Member States must
affirm that all human rights applied to all by rejecting
the proposed amendment. In 2010, the General
Assembly had overwhelmingly voted to reinsert
language on sexual orientation to the resolution
concerned. Since that time, the Human Rights
Committee had reiterated that all human rights applied
to every individual regardless of their sexual
orientation or gender identity. As in 2010, Member
States should reaffirm that principle by rejecting the
proposed amendment.
49. Mr. de Séllos (Brazil) said that paragraph 6 (b)
should remain as originally proposed, since it
concerned groups of individuals who were in a
vulnerable position and more likely to suffer deadly
violence, as well as situations in which impunity was
more common. The draft resolution addressed the most
serious human rights violation: the denial of the right
to life because of discrimination. Paragraph 6 (b) must
therefore be clear in providing that no State could
accept any execution carried out on discriminatory
grounds, including on account of a person’s sexual
orientation or gender identity. Brazil would vote
against the proposed amendment.
50. Mr. Mashabane (South Africa) said that his
country was fully committed to respecting the
fundamental values and freedoms laid down in the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
and the principle of equality and non-discrimination
permeated all spheres of life in South African society.
His country’s Constitution had been modelled on the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and sexual
orientation was expressly mentioned as one of the
grounds on which discrimination was prohibited. The
purpose of paragraph 6 (b) was to protect a category of
persons who were particularly vulnerable, and South
Africa would therefore vote against the proposed
amendment.
51. A recorded vote was taken on the amendment
proposed by the United Arab Emirates on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that were
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
contained in A/C.3/67/L.68.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Cameroon, China, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Yemen.
Against:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, SouthA/C.3/67/SR.42
12-59805 8
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Benin, Bhutan,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic,
Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Mali,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Peru, Philippines, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Sri Lanka, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tuvalu, United Republic of Tanzania,
Vanuatu, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
52. The proposed amendment contained in
A/C.3/67/L.68 was rejected by 86 votes to 44, with 31
abstentions.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36
53. The Chair said that a recorded vote had been
requested.
54. Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden) said that the issue at
the heart of the draft resolution was the right to life,
which was a precondition for the enjoyment of all other
human rights. The draft resolution addressed Member
States’ most fundamental responsibilities, in particular
their duty to bring to justice those responsible for
extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary killings. Sweden
was grateful for all the support that it had received
from Member States during the discussions on the draft
resolution, and on behalf of the Nordic countries it
urged all delegations to vote in favour.
Statements made in explanation of vote before the
voting
55. Mr. Ansari Dogaheh (Islamic Republic of Iran)
said that, as a party to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, his country was fully
committed to its international obligations, especially
those relating to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, and it therefore agreed with the core
message of the draft resolution. However, the nature of
the negotiations, in particular the organization of a
limited number of informal sessions, had resulted in a
draft resolution that exclusively reflected the views of
certain Member States which firmly supported the
overall objective of the draft resolution but had
different views about capital punishment. In addition,
the issue of sexual orientation and gender identity had
been included in the text even though it did not enjoy
global support. The lack of flexibility on the part of the
sponsors in accommodating the different views of
Member States could undermine the overall objective
of the draft resolution. Iran looked forward to a more
constructive approach in future negotiations. In the
meantime, it would vote against the draft resolution.
56. Mr. Mashabane (South Africa), expressing his
delegation’s support for the draft resolution, said that
the extrajudicial or arbitrary killing of a human being
could not be justified under any circumstances. Taking
a person’s life was the ultimate violation of human
rights, and the right to life should not be restricted to
specific categories of individuals.
57. Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago) said that her
country was a firm supporter of the rule of law and
strongly condemned the extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary killing of any person. It would therefore vote
in favour of the draft resolution, even though it was
unable to support certain provisions contained in the
eighth preambular paragraph and paragraph 6 (b). A
more general wording of paragraph 6 (b) would have
been adequate to cover all persons executed for any
and all discriminatory reasons. Moreover, the specific
reference to gender identity presented challenges for
Trinidad and Tobago, since its national gender policy
was still under consideration, and accepting the
inclusion of that language in the draft resolution could
have public policy implications. All citizens of
Trinidad and Tobago were afforded full, unconditional
protection against extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
execution, even without the explicit mention of sexual
orientation and gender identity. The inclusion of those
words in the draft resolution could also present
practical problems at the international level, given that
a universally agreed definition of the concept of gender
identity remained elusive. Consequently, while
Trinidad and Tobago recognized that the draft
resolution as a whole addressed a critical issue, it
maintained reservations concerning the eighth
preambular paragraph and paragraph 6 (b).
58. Mr. Lim (Singapore) said that his country
unequivocally condemned extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, and all countries had a solemn
duty to prevent and investigate any killing of innocent
civilians during armed or civil conflicts. That had been
the traditional focus of the resolution and SingaporeA/C.3/67/SR.42
9 12-59805
had therefore been surprised that a link was now being
drawn between capital punishment and arbitrary
deprivation of life on the basis of the latest report of
the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions (A/67/275). Capital punishment
was outside the remit of the Special Rapporteur, and it
was deeply regrettable that the draft resolution referred
to capital punishment in the context of arbitrary
execution. Any attempt to liken capital punishment to
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary execution was
frivolous and extralegal, and certain provisions of the
draft resolution could be equating the death penalty
with genocide and war crimes. Singapore could not
accept that association and would therefore abstain.
The purpose of the draft resolution was to galvanize
the international community and coordinate efforts to
protect innocent civilians against genocide and mass
atrocities. It should not be politicized or used as a
platform by groups arbitrarily to impose their views
about countries’ domestic legislation on the death
penalty. Singapore remained committed to
strengthening global efforts to combat extrajudicial,
summary and arbitrary executions, and stood ready to
engage in dialogue to that end.
59. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that his country was
gravely alarmed at the systematic attempts being made
through the resolution to legitimize undefined notions
of sexual orientation and gender identity, and
reinterpret the internationally agreed human rights
instruments by equating discrimination on the basis of
undefined notions with other forms of discrimination
universally recognized and clearly codified in those
instruments. Universal consensus and clear definitions
had not yet been achieved for the controversial
concepts contained in paragraph 6 (b) of the draft
resolution.
60. Extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary executions
must not take place on any basis. However, Egypt’s
strong commitment to combating all forms of
discrimination and violence should not be exploited to
impose undefined notions that restricted social and
cultural norms, as well as the obligation of Member
States to protect morality, public order and the general
welfare of a democratic society.
61. Egypt was gravely concerned at the attempts to
create new rights and standards not agreed on by
Member States. Such attempts seriously jeopardized
the entire human rights framework, which had been
established on the basis of dialogue, mutual
understanding and respect for the specificities of
Member States. Egypt would continue to reject any
attempt to impose undefined concepts that fell outside
the international human rights framework negotiated
and adopted by Member States, and would therefore
continue to abstain on the resolution concerned. It
urged all Member States to uphold the universally
recognized human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and refrain from imposing controversial undefined
notions on the United Nations.
62. Ms. Williams (Grenada) said that her country
strongly condemned the taking of human life and fully
complied with its obligations under the various human
rights conventions. However, the eighth preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution created an
unacceptable link between the arbitrary deprivation of
life and capital punishment. Grenada would vote in
favour of the draft resolution but maintained a strong
reservation to the eighth preambular paragraph.
63. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/67/L.36.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada,
Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain andA/C.3/67/SR.42
12-59805 10
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
Against:
Iran (Islamic Republic of).
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, China, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana,
Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
64. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.36 was adopted by
108 votes to 1, with 65 abstentions.
65. Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago) said that for
technical reasons her country’s vote had not been
recorded, but it had intended to vote in favour of the
resolution.
Statements made in explanation of vote after the voting
66. Mr. Kumar (India) said that his country attached
great importance to the resolution, but the issue of
capital punishment had no place in it. The death
penalty was carried out in India only in very severe
cases, and the national legislation provided full
safeguards. A death sentence must be confirmed by a
superior court and the accused had the right to appeal.
India shared the concerns raised by Singapore
concerning the eighth preambular paragraph, but had
voted in favour of the resolution since it supported its
core objective. However, it looked forward to more
open, inclusive, transparent discussions on the
resolution in the future, so that broader consensus
could be reached on Member States’ collective
endeavour to prevent and eliminate extrajudicial,
summary and arbitrary executions.
67. Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica) said that his country
condemned all forms of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions carried out on any basis and
supported efforts at all levels to combat such acts.
However, it had reservations concerning the eighth
preambular paragraph and certain provisions of
paragraph 5. Although Jamaica had voted in favour of
the resolution as a whole, the wording of those two
paragraphs implied that the use of the death penalty
constituted extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
execution, which was an interpretation not shared by
his country. Capital punishment was not arbitrary and
did not conflict with domestic or international law. As
a result, Jamaica did not support specific calls upon
States which retained the death penalty, since the
responsibility to comply with international human
rights instruments was a universal one accepted by all
States parties.
68. Jamaica’s reservation to paragraph 6 went beyond
the issue of sexual orientation and gender identity. The
paragraph was cumbersome and unwieldy, and a more
holistic approach was required instead of a non-
exhaustive list of categories of individuals. The focus
of the paragraph should be the broad concept of
preventing discrimination against all vulnerable
persons. Jamaica hoped that future negotiations on the
resolution would result in a more general reference to
all vulnerable groups. The resolution should not
include politically divisive issues or impose one value
system over another.
69. Ms. Cousens (United States of America) said that
all States must protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and take effective action to combat
extrajudicial killings and punish the perpetrators.
Countries with the death penalty must also abide by
their international obligations relating to due process,
fair trial and the use of such punishment for only the
most serious of crimes. The United States agreed with
much of the resolution, including the wording of the
provisions which condemned the extrajudicial killing
of members of vulnerable groups, especially those
targeted on account of their sexual orientation or
gender identity. However, it had concerns about the
language of the draft resolution in some parts and had
therefore abstained. Unfortunately, the text did not
make clear that there was not one but two bodies of
law that regulated unlawful killings of individuals by
Governments: international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. Those two bodies ofA/C.3/67/SR.42
11 12-59805
law were complementary and mutually reinforcing, and
determining which rules applied to Government action
during an armed conflict was highly fact-specific. The
wording of the resolution contributed to legal
uncertainty about how those two important bodies of
law applied, and the United States had therefore not
been in a position to vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
70. Mr. Hisajima (Japan) said that his country had
concerns about the reference in paragraph 5 of the draft
resolution to reports by the Special Rapporteur on the
death penalty, since some of the recommendations
made in those reports went beyond the provisions of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. Clearly, the death penalty did not constitute
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary execution, nor did
it violate international law. Japan had therefore voted
in favour of the resolution as a whole on the
understanding that paragraph 5 did not stipulate that
Member States were obliged to abide by specific
recommendations concerning the death penalty made in
the reports of the Special Rapporteur unless they were
required to do so under international law.
71. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) said that it was
regrettable that references to capital punishment
appeared in the 2012 draft resolution, since it was an
issue of national sovereignty. For that reason China had
abstained. It urged the sponsors to respect the judicial
sovereignty of Member States in the spirit of mutual
respect and to refrain from imposing their views on
others.
72. Ms. Ibrahim (Brunei Darussalam) said that her
country fully supported the principles enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
international human rights laws, taking into account
specific national circumstances. While it agreed with
the overall objectives of the draft resolution, it had
abstained owing to its reservation to the eighth
preambular paragraph. The issue of capital punishment
should not be included in the draft resolution, since it
was a matter of criminal justice, not human rights. In
Brunei Darussalam, the death penalty was applied as a
deterrent, and to enable people to live in peace and
security. Due process, fair conduct of trials and judicial
safeguards were strictly enforced, and the country’s
capital punishment process did not violate any
international law.
Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.45: Committee against
Torture
73. The Chair drew attention to the programme
budget implications of draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.45
contained in document A/C.3/67/L.60.
74. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Chile, Cyprus, France,
Guatemala, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Mali, Montenegro, Poland, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey
had joined the sponsors.
75. Ms. Kofoed (Denmark) said that the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment laid down the fundamental
principle of the absolute prohibition of torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment. The Committee against Torture had been
established to monitor implementation of that
important principle and the Convention as a whole by
its States parties. However, in order to undertake its
mandated functions, the Committee needed sufficient
time to meet each year to consider State party reports
and individual complaints. In 2010 the General
Assembly had decided to authorize the Committee to
meet for an additional week per session in 2011 and
2012, during which time the Committee had considered
an additional 10 reports and 20 individual
communications. However, the work was far from
done, and the draft resolution therefore authorized the
Committee to continue meeting for an additional week
per session in 2013 and 2014.
76. At the last informal session the decision had been
taken to replace the word “encourages” with “urges” in
paragraph 1 of the draft resolution. Lastly, Argentina,
Armenia, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Brazil, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Uruguay and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the sponsors.
77. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia,
Kyrgyzstan and Ukraine had also joined the sponsors.A/C.3/67/SR.42
12-59805 12
78. Draft resolution A/C.3/67/L.45, as orally revised,
was adopted.
79. Ms. Razzouk (United States of America) said
that her country was strongly committed to eliminating
torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment and holding the perpetrators
accountable, and had adopted strong legislative
measures to that end. Treaty bodies played a critical
role in reviewing implementation of human rights
obligations by States parties to international
conventions, and the United States fully supported the
work of the Committee against Torture. However, in
view of the current economic situation, her country
must dissociate itself from the draft resolution because
of the provisions of paragraph 2, which authorized the
Committee to meet for an additional week per session
beginning in 2013. It was important to assess and
enhance the effectiveness of all treaty bodies through
the treaty body strengthening process.
80. Ms. Walker (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland), speaking on behalf of her own
country and Japan, said that both countries had joined
the consensus on the resolution, but had serious
concerns about the approach taken as a solution to a
much wider problem. The Committee had taken
positive steps to increase the efficiency of its working
methods, but a solution must be found to the
Committee’s continued backlog, since temporary
extensions of meeting time did not solve the problem.
It was regrettable that their concerns about the ad hoc
solution provided in the draft resolution had not been
taken into account and that compromise proposals had
not been properly considered. Member States should
focus their efforts on the wider treaty body
strengthening process in order to tackle the underlying
causes of the backlog and ensure a holistic solution
instead of ineffective and costly ad hoc measures.
81. Mr. Hisajima (Japan) said that a long-term
solution to the backlog must be found, and efforts
should be made to minimize additional expenditure in
view of the severe financial constraints in the regular
budget. It would make more sense to consider an
extension of meeting time at the sixty-eighth session
on the basis of the outcome of the ongoing treaty body
strengthening process. For financial reasons, Japan had
serious concerns about approving an extension of four
weeks at the current time, and had hoped to find ways
to minimize additional expenditure through
compromise solutions. It was regrettable that it had not
been given sufficient time to hold constructive
discussions to that end. Japan therefore urged the
Secretariat to minimize additional resource
requirements arising from the extension of meeting
time, and encouraged the Committee against Torture to
continue its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.