United Nations A/C.3/65/SR.50
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fifth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
20 January 2011
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
10-64605 (E)
*1064605*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 50th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 22 November 2010, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Tommo Monthe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)
Contents
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Agenda item 67: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/65/SR.50
10-64605 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/65/336)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.46/Rev.1: Combating
defamation of religions
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
2. Ms. Bouhamidi (Morocco), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.46/Rev.1 on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and
speaking in Morocco’s capacity as Chair of the OIC
working committee on human rights and humanitarian
affairs, said that Bolivia (Plurinational State of) and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the
sponsors. The sponsors had noted with growing
concern an increasing trend to erosion of the
international human rights legal framework. Priority
was being given to some fundamental rights rather than
others, leading to justification and even legitimization
of practices that incited racial and religious hatred
and acts of discrimination and violence. A
non-discriminatory approach based on respect and
tolerance for diverse views, beliefs and religious
sensitivities was key to preserving the multicultural
fabric of the international order. The draft resolution
was being presented once again in order to address that
issue comprehensively and to respond to emerging
calls in reports by many senior United Nations
officials, including the Special Rapporteur on freedom
of religion or belief and the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, and other
stakeholders, to combat the increasing trend of
defamation of religions.
3. The draft resolution did not detract from the
mandates of the special rapporteurs but rather enriched
and complemented them. The sponsors had added a
provision to the previous year’s text to invoke the
notion of rights and responsibilities, and the promotion
and protection of fundamental rights, defending the
rights of all to freedom from racial or religious
discrimination. The OIC group had conducted
extensive consultations, adopting a flexible and
constructive approach of transparent and open dialogue
with all delegations and groups. An array of
amendments had been introduced to address the
concerns of all partners. The scope of the text had been
broadened to address all religions by adding a new
reference to Islamophobia, Judeaophobia and
Christianophobia, removing one reference to Muslim
minorities and adding a reference to religious
minorities, changing the word “defamation” to
“vilification”, adding a reference to article 27 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and emphasizing the international obligations of
Member States in accordance with international law
and international human rights instruments. A
consensus on the resolution would provide impetus and
strengthen collective efforts in the fight against all
forms of racial and religious intolerance,
discrimination and violence.
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(a) Advancement of women (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.20/Rev.1: Trafficking in
women and girls
4. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
5. Ms. Hernando (Philippines), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.20/Rev.1, said that Argentina,
Australia, Iceland, Serbia and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) had joined the sponsors. The text of the
resolution was the product of extensive negotiations
and represented the broadest possible consensus.
6. The Secretary said that Albania, Angola,
Armenia, Bangladesh, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cape Verde, the Comoros, the Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Ecuador, Ethiopia, the Gambia,
Grenada, Guatemala, India, Italy, Jordan, Kenya,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Maldives, Mali,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia, Nicaragua,
the Niger, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Rwanda,
San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, the
Sudan, Swaziland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia and Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution.A/C.3/65/SR.50
3 10-64605
7. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.20/Rev.1 was adopted.
8. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation aligned itself with the consensus on draft
resolution A/C.3/65/L.20/Rev.1. Her Government made
every effort to eradicate all trafficking in persons and
contributed effectively to regional and international
efforts aimed at combating trafficking in persons,
particularly women and girls.
9. Her delegation was disappointed at the lack of
response to its concerns, especially regarding
paragraph 6, in which her delegation had sought to
include a reference to complex emergencies, especially
as mention was made of natural disaster and post-
conflict reconstruction. She wondered how Member
States could call upon the United Nations system to
mainstream, as appropriate, the issue of trafficking in
persons, especially women and girls, into its broader
policies and programmes aimed at addressing economic
and social development, human rights, the rule of law,
good governance, education, health, natural disasters
and post-conflict reconstruction, without addressing
complex emergencies. Such emergencies provided
fertile ground for the emergence and growth of human
trafficking and made it possible for the perpetrators and
organizers of those crimes to act with impunity.
10. Her delegation would continue its efforts to
mainstream the fundamental causes of and contributory
factors to the emergence and growth of trafficking,
especially as the presence of foreign occupation and
cases of complex emergency had caused her region to
be affected by trafficking. She hoped that, in future,
equal attention would be paid to the concerns of all
delegations.
11. Ms. Hernando (Philippines) said that the
sponsors’ goal had been to address the problem of
trafficking and that the concern raised by the Syrian
delegation had been adequately addressed in another
paragraph of the resolution. The practice of some
delegations of making proposals at the eleventh hour
was a cause of concern, as it disrupted the negotiation
process.
12. The Chair, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 55/488, proposed that the Committee should
take note of the following documents: Report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women on its forty-fourth and forty-fifth
sessions (A/65/38); and Note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report on the activities of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (A/65/218).
13. It was so decided.
Agenda item 67: Right of peoples to self-determination
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.52: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
14. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
15. Mr. Selim (Egypt), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.52, said that Antigua and Barbuda,
Barbados, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica,
Dominica, Gabon, Gambia, Liberia, Malawi, Nigeria,
Rwanda, San Marino and Ukraine had joined the
sponsors. The inalienable right to self-determination
was enshrined in international law and international
human rights instruments. It was not a gift to be
bestowed by the international community on peoples
living under colonialism and foreign occupation.
Adoption of the draft resolution by consensus would
send a strong positive message of solidarity to the
Palestinian people and would surely contribute to the
ultimate realization of their long-overdue right to self-
determination and the establishment of their
independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
16. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Bosnia and Herzegovina, Egypt, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Spain and Sweden had joined the sponsors.
17. Ms. Furman (Israel), speaking in explanation of
vote before the vote, said that in 2009, the new Prime
Minister of Israel had spoken of his vision of peace,
with two free peoples living side by side in that small
land, with good neighbourly relations and mutual
respect, each with its flag, anthem and Government,
with neither one threatening its neighbour’s security or
existence. The Prime Minister’s offer to meet at any
time and in any place to discuss peace was still valid.
18. Israel would vote against the resolution because
real progress towards the self-determination of the
Palestinian people would come not from one-sided
political resolutions but through direct bilateral
negotiations. Israel continued to call on the Palestinian
leadership to return to negotiations without
preconditions. The road to peace was not an easy one,A/C.3/65/SR.50
10-64605 4
but peace could certainly not be achieved until the two
sides sat down to talk.
19. The draft resolution called for the unity of the
Palestinian territories, but failed to address the fact that
Hamas terrorists had violently seized control of the
Gaza Strip, separating it administratively from the
West Bank. Furthermore, the resolution failed to place
any responsibility on the Palestinians to respect the
safety and security of the State of Israel. Thousands of
rockets and mortars had been launched against Israel in
recent years, and during the previous weekend, another
seven mortars and one long-range rocket had been fired
from the Gaza Strip. Real peace should be based on
security, mutual recognition and mutual respect, in
order to ensure prosperity for the two peoples.
20. At the request of the representative of Israel, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.52.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
21. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.52 was adopted by
174 votes to 5, with 3 abstentions.
22. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that his
delegation welcomed the adoption of the draft resolution
and had also welcomed the adoption of draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.51 on the right to self-determination of
peoples that were still under colonial domination or
foreign occupation. The right to self-determination
should be interpreted in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2625
(XXV) and other relevant United Nations resolutions.
23. The exercise of the right to self-determination
presupposed that there was an active subject in the
form of a people subject to alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation, as defined in paragraph 1
of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). Without
such a subject, there was no right to self-determination.
The Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas
had been unlawfully occupied by the United Kingdom,
which had expelled the Argentine population and
authorities in order to install its own population there.
Therefore, it was not the right to self-determination,
but rather the other important principle of
decolonization, territorial integrity, that should apply.A/C.3/65/SR.50
5 10-64605
24. All of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Special Committee on
decolonization had highlighted the special and
particular colonial situation of the Malvinas Islands,
recognizing the existence of a sovereignty dispute
between Argentina and the United Kingdom and noting
that the way to resolve that dispute was through the
resumption of bilateral negotiations with a view to
finding a just, peaceful and lasting solution as soon as
possible, taking into account the interests of the
islanders.
25. Mr. Lomax (United Kingdom), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, said that the United
Kingdom had no doubt concerning its sovereignty over
the Falkland Islands. No negotiations would be held on
that subject unless and until such time as the islanders
themselves so desired. The British Government
attached great importance to the principle of self-
determination, as set out in Article 1.2 of the Charter
and article 1 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. That principle underlined his
Government’s position on the Falkland Islands.
26. The United Kingdom’s relationship with all its
overseas territories was a modern one, based on
partnership, shared values, and the right of each
territory, including the Falkland Islands, to determine
whether it wished to retain a link to the United
Kingdom. During the debate of the Special Committee
on decolonization in the current session, the
democratically elected representatives of the Falkland
Islands had once again asked the Committee to
recognize their right to exercise their right to self-
determination. They had reiterated that the Falkland
Islands had no indigenous people and that no civilian
population had been removed prior to their people
settling on the Islands over eight generations
previously. They were and had been the only people
living in the Falkland Islands and they did not wish for
any change in the status of the Falkland Islands.
27. Ms. Rasheed (Observer for Palestine) said that
the brutal denial of the Palestinian people’s right to
self-determination was the cause of their suffering and
of the problems faced by the Middle East region as a
whole. The international community’s continuous
affirmation of that right was critical. The resolution
could only promote peace and should not be seen as
contrary to the peace efforts, but as complementary and
necessary. The right to self-determination was not a
permanent status issue or an issue for negotiation, but
an inalienable right of all peoples. Israel’s negative
vote had sent the message that it rejected the creation
of a Palestinian State and the vision of two States
living side by side in peace and security. By opposing
the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination,
Israel was violating the crux of the agreements, namely
mutual recognition between the two sides. It was not
possible to recognize the Palestinian people and their
rights and yet refuse that people the right to self-
determination.
28. The two-State solution for peace was seriously
undermined by the continuation of illegal Israeli
policies and practices. The continued colonization of
Palestinian land, through the illegal settlement
campaign and the unlawful construction of an
expansionist wall in the occupied Palestinian territory,
was seriously undermining the Palestinian people’s
right to self-determination and the possibility of
realizing the two-State solution. Those activities were
the true threat to a peaceful settlement.
29. The 174 votes in favour and the 135 sponsors of
the draft resolution illustrated the fact that the Israeli
representative’s statement was merely an attempt by
the occupying Power to distort the context of the
occupation. Any solution for peace in the Middle East
had to recognize and guarantee the basic rights of both
peoples. Recognizing the Palestinian people’s right to
self-determination, including their right to an
independent State of Palestine, was clearly a first step
in that direction. The Palestinian people would not
surrender that right under any circumstances and would
continue their efforts until an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, was not just a
dream or an aspiration, but a Palestinian reality.
Agenda item 68: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/65/336)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.32/Rev.1: Elimination of all
forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on
religion or belief
30. Mr. Nihon (Belgium), speaking on behalf of the
sponsors of the draft resolution, said that they stressed
the paramount importance of the right to freedom of
religion and belief, and were deeply concerned over theA/C.3/65/SR.50
10-64605 6
rise in instances of intolerance and violence against
religious communities and minorities. They also
welcomed the adoption by consensus of many relevant
General Assembly resolutions.
31. In order to obtain the desired consensus, the
sponsors had unfortunately not been able to state in the
resolution that the freedom of religion and belief must
also include the right to change or abandon one’s
religion or belief. They would also have preferred to be
more specific about stressing the importance of
anti-discrimination legislation to combat religious
intolerance.
32. In order to achieve consensus, the following oral
amendments had been proposed. After paragraph 10, a
new paragraph 10 bis should be inserted which would
then become paragraph 11, and all subsequent
paragraphs would be renumbered accordingly. That
new paragraph was the text of paragraph 6 from the
consensus Human Rights Council resolution 14/11
“Freedom of Religion and Belief: Mandate of the
Special Rapporteur” and which read:
Expresses concern at the continued existence
of instances of religious intolerance, as well as
emerging obstacles to the enjoyment of the right to
freedom of religion or belief, inter alia:
(a) Instances of intolerance and violence
directed against members of many religious
minorities and other communities in various parts
of the world;
(b) Incidents of religious hatred,
discrimination, intolerance and violence, which
may be manifested by the derogatory stereotyping,
negative profiling and stigmatization of persons
based on their religion or belief;
(c) Attacks on religious places, sites and
shrines in violation of international law, in
particular human rights and humanitarian law, as
they have more than material significance on the
dignity and lives of members of communities
holding spiritual or religious beliefs;
(d) Instances, both in law and practice,
that constitute violations of the fundamental right
to freedom of religion or belief, including of the
individual right to publicly express one’s spiritual
and religious beliefs, taking into account the
relevant articles of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, as well as other
international documents;
(e) Constitutional and legislative systems
that fail to provide adequate and effective
guarantees of freedom of thought, conscience,
religion and belief to all without distinction.
33. Preambular paragraph 9 and paragraph 10 (h) had
been deleted from L.32/Rev.1 since they had become
redundant with the insertion of the new paragraph. In
view of subparagraph 9 (e) of the new paragraph, the
words “at constitutional and legal systems that fail to
provide adequate and effective guarantees of freedom
of thought, conscience and religion or belief to all
without distinction” had been deleted. Preambular
paragraph 10 in its final form would thus read:
“Concerned at the increasing number of laws and
regulations that limit the freedom of thought,
conscience and religion or belief, and at the
implementation of existing laws in a discriminatory
manner,”.
34. The European Union hoped that the Committee
would adopt draft resolution L.32/Rev.1, as orally
revised, without a vote.
35. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cape Verde, Côte
d’Ivoire, Ecuador, India, New Zealand, Paraguay,
Philippines, United Republic of Tanzania, Turkey and
Uruguay had joined the sponsors.
36. Ms. Bouhamidi (Morocco), speaking on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) in
explanation of position, said that the OIC opposed all
forms of intolerance and discrimination based on
religion or belief. It condemned in the strongest
possible terms all acts of violence falsely claimed by
their perpetrators to be in the name of religion, and
firmly believed that all world religions shared the same
message of peace, respect for others and reverence for
the sanctity of life. In that context, the OIC reaffirmed
that terrorism must not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group. It had
consistently supported the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief, and had
no fundamental problems with the general thrust of the
draft resolution.
37. Despite the compromises made during the
negotiation process, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference still had concerns on some importantA/C.3/65/SR.50
7 10-64605
issues, including respect for national laws and religious
norms about the right to change one’s religion. While
emphasizing the importance of freedom of expression,
the OIC also considered that in some cases religious
intolerance resulted from its misuse. Further, while
acknowledging the important role of media in
combating religious intolerance, it emphasized the
importance of working with media organizations to
promote tolerance and understanding of religions,
cultural diversity and multiculturalism.
38. The OIC was of the view that people were not
inherently vulnerable but were made vulnerable due to
their social and political contexts. It therefore
understood the reference in the text of the draft
resolution to vulnerable individuals to be strictly
confined to women, children, peoples living under
foreign occupation, refugees, asylum-seekers and
internally displaced persons, migrants, persons
deprived of their liberty and persons belonging to
national, ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities, with
regard to their ability to exercise freely their right to
freedom of religion or belief.
39. It also understood the freedom to adopt a religion
or belief of one’s choice and the freedom to manifest
religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship and
observance to be applicable both to the individual and
the religious community to which the individual
belonged. Thus, defamation of religion was a serious
threat to that freedom, as it could lead to the illicit
restriction of the freedom of religion, incitement to
religious hatred and violence, social disharmony and
violations of human rights.
40. Despite divergence on those issues, however, the
OIC had decided to join the consensus on the draft
resolution.
41. Mr. Mashabane (South Africa), speaking in
explanation of position, said that the draft resolution
posed major challenges to his delegation, in that it did
not address all the pertinent elements of the issue of
freedom of religion or belief, in particular
contemporary manifestations associated with violations
in that context. South Africa believed in the exercise of
the right to freedom of opinion and expression as
understood in international human rights law and
enshrined in its Constitution. A delicate balance must
be maintained, however, in the exercise of that right
and the right to freedom of religion or belief as
understood in articles 19 and 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
42. The absence of language in the text stating that
acts of incitement to religious hatred should be
punishable by law could only lead to resolutions that
flouted the provisions of international human rights
law. Further, it was inconceivable that the text could be
silent on the role of media in incitement to religious
hatred. The international human rights system must
strive at all times to provide maximum remedies for
victims, eliminate impunity and maintain the delicate
balance between the exercise of the right of freedom of
religion or belief and the right to freedom of opinion
and expression. His delegation therefore dissociated
itself from the text of the draft resolution.
43. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.32/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.41/Rev.1: The right to
development
44. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution contained no programme budget
implications.
45. Ms. Astiasaran Arias (Cuba) said that her
delegation was introducing the draft resolution in its
capacity as coordinator of the Working Group on
Human Rights of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. The Movement attached great importance to
the right to development and urged all States to
formulate policies and programmes at the national
level for its realization. The text of the current draft
resolution highlighted in particular the commemoration
in 2011 of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Declaration on the Right to Development. The
language of the draft resolution had been revised to
reflect that of Human Rights Council resolution 15/25,
adopted in October 2010.
46. Mr. Selim (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that those
countries strongly believed that the full realization of
the right to development was among rights
fundamental to promoting a culture of peace and
friendly relations among nations, as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations. Further, they believed
that democracy and good governance, development and
respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
in particular the right to development, were
interdependent and mutually reinforcing. Noting theA/C.3/65/SR.50
10-64605 8
interdependence of nations and the varying levels of
human development worldwide, the Heads of State and
Government of the Movement had reaffirmed the need
for a new global order aimed at reversing the growing
disparities between rich and poor through poverty
eradication, full and productive employment, decent
work and social integration.
47. Accordingly, it urged all States to undertake at
the national level the necessary policy measures
required for the implementation of the right to
development. At the same time, it urged the United
Nations human rights machinery to ensure the
operationalization of the right to development as a
priority, including the elaboration of a convention on
the right to development. That right should also be
mainstreamed in the policies and operational activities
of United Nations specialized agencies, funds and
programmes, as well as in the international financial
and multilateral trading systems.
48. The draft resolution was a genuine attempt to
fulfil the aspirations of all peoples for development and
prosperity, and it was regrettable that the text would be
put to a vote. It was to be hoped that, with more
interest and determination, consensus could be
achieved in the future.
49. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that his Government had announced a new global
development policy, which placed a premium on broad-
based economic growth, democratic governance,
innovation and sustainable systems for meeting basic
human needs. It recognized development as a long-
term proposition and that progress depended to a great
extent on policies chosen and the quality of institutions
in developing countries.
50. The objectives of that policy aligned closely with
the broader thrust of the draft resolution on the right to
development. His delegation regretted, however, that it
must call for a vote, as it did not believe that the text
reflected consensus on the best way to achieve the
shared commitment to development. In particular, it
did not consider it appropriate as stated in paragraph 8
of the draft resolution, for any criteria related to the
right to development to evolve into a basis for
consideration of an international legal standard of a
binding nature. His delegation would therefore vote
against the draft resolution.
51. Ms. Sunderland (Canada) said that Canada
supported the concept of the right to development, with
the individual at its core as both the main participant
and beneficiary of development. In the view of her
delegation the right to development was an important
bridge between all human rights. It was the primary
responsibility of States to ensure the fulfilment of that
right.
52. Canada had supported the 1986 Declaration on
the Right to Development and had been actively
engaged in discussions on that topic ever since,
including in the Working Group on the right to
development, which it viewed as a useful forum to help
build consensus on the difficult and sometimes divisive
issues surrounding that right.
53. Her delegation was concerned that the draft
resolution would undercut and weaken the spirit of
consensus that had been building recently. It also had
serious concerns regarding a legally binding instrument
on the right to development. There was currently no
international consensus on the consideration of that
option. In the view of her delegation, it would be better
to focus on development and sharing of best practices
and strengthening existing initiatives rather than
seeking to create new legal obligations.
54. As the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration
approached, Canada hoped for constructive dialogue
and compromise on the challenges being faced.
However, for the reasons outlined, her delegation
would vote against the draft resolution.
55. At the request of the United States of America, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/65/L.41/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,A/C.3/65/SR.50
9 10-64605
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Republic of
Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Finland, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Norway, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine.
56. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.41/Rev.1 was adopted
by 130 votes to 22, with 28 abstentions.
57. Ms. Fontana (Switzerland), speaking in
explanation of vote, said that her delegation had voted
against the draft resolution because of the wording of
paragraph 8, which did not match the wording of the
resolution on that topic adopted in the Human Rights
Council. Her delegation therefore regretted that it must
distance itself from the current text. It regretted the
lack of true negotiation on the text and hoped that a
more inclusive approach would be taken in the future.
58. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union in explanation of vote, said that
the European Union believed that the right to
development was an integral part of fundamental
human rights and that a lack of development could not
be invoked to justify the abrogation of internationally
recognized rights. It would continue to play an active
role in implementation of the right to development; for
a number of years the European Union had been the
largest provider of development aid. Nevertheless, it
stressed that it was the primary responsibility of States
to create the conditions for the realization of the right
to development, while acknowledging that national
development efforts must be supported by an enabling
international economic environment.
59. The definition of the right to development was
still changing and remained ambiguous. Therefore it
was the understanding of the European Union that the
work of the Working Group on the right to
development did not imply a process leading to a
binding international legal standard. It had actively
supported resolutions on the right to development both
in the General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council when they had been drafted with a truly
constructive and balanced approach. However, it was
the view of the European Union that the draft
resolution did not accurately reflect the work of the
Working Group. The fulfilment of the right to
development must evolve on the basis of consensus,
avoiding politicization and built on the promotion and
respect for civil, political, economic, social and
cultural rights.
60. The European Union reiterated its suggestion that
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries should
consider a procedural resolution on the right to
development in the General Assembly in order to keep
the focus on the right to development in Geneva, where
the High Commissioner for Human Rights had
presented a report on the topic to the past session of the
Human Rights Council.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.42/Rev.1: The right to food
61. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution contained no programme budget
implications.A/C.3/65/SR.50
10-64605 10
62. Ms. Astiasaran Arias (Cuba) said that despite
the fact that the right to food had been recognized in
international human rights instruments, over 1 billion
people around the world, mostly in developing
countries, still suffered from hunger. The text of the
draft resolution also emphasized that without an
enabling international economic environment, that
right could not be realized.
63. Since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries had joined the sponsors: Armenia,
Australia, Barbados, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Ghana, India, Jamaica, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Mali,
Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Sri Lanka,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago and
Zimbabwe.
64. During the informal consultations, the following
delegations had also joined the sponsors: Austria,
Belgium, Croatia, Cyprus, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxemburg, Malta,
Mexico, Mongolia, Netherlands, Norway, Philippines,
Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu and United Kingdom.
65. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Burkina
Faso, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Montenegro, Republic of
Moldova, Nauru, Rwanda, San Marino, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Ukraine had also
indicated that they wished to join the sponsors.
66. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.42/Rev.1 was
adopted.
67. Ms. Melon (Argentina) said that her Government
was deeply concerned at the global situation of food
insecurity. It attached great importance to all regional
and multilateral initiatives to address that issue, and, as
a member of the Food Security Committee of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), had contributed to its reform.
68. Nevertheless, her Government would continue to
fight the extortionate agricultural and trade policies of
the developed countries that had led to disinvestment
in the agricultural sectors of developing countries. It
did not share the view that the concept of food
sovereignty should replace food security. Trade
policies should be adjusted to reflect the necessary
reforms of the rules of international trade and the
General Assembly should look at the relationship
between extortionate trade policies and agricultural
subsidies, which led to imbalances in global
agriculture.
69. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
improving global food security was among the key
foreign policy objectives of his Government. It had
strongly supported the adoption of the Rome Principles
on food security adopted at the 2009 World Food
Summit, and was committed to accelerating progress
on Millennium Development Goal 1 — halving
extreme poverty by 2015 — by investing in country
plans to boost agricultural development.
70. The United States of America was not a party to
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, and by joining consensus on the draft
resolution, did not recognize any change in current
conventional or customary international law regarding
rights related to food. It interpreted the references in
the draft resolution to the right to food, with respect to
States parties to that Covenant, in the light of its
article 2, paragraph 1, and its references to the
obligations of Member States regarding the right to
food as applicable to the extent that they had assumed
such obligations. While the United States had for the
past decade been the world’s largest food aid donor, it
did not concur with any reading of the resolution that
would suggest the States had particular extraterritorial
obligations arising from the right to food.
71. The United States was committed to international
trade liberalization and to the conclusion of the Doha
Round of trade negotiations. Opening markets through
such trade agreements could generate the economic
growth necessary to spur development. At the same
time, the draft resolution would in no way undermine
or modify the commitments of the United States or any
other Government to existing trade agreements or
ongoing negotiations.
72. Similarly, he reiterated the view that the
implementation of the World Trade Organization
(WTO) Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) supported
comprehensive approaches to food security by
encouraging policies that enabled countries to use tools
and incentives, including biotechnology, that increased
agricultural productivity. By joining the consensus on
the draft resolution, it supported continued
implementation of the TRIPS Agreement, which
provided for patent and plant variety protectionA/C.3/65/SR.50
11 10-64605
systems of benefit for researchers, producers,
consumers and society.
73. Mr. Burniat (Belgium), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, as well as Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine, said that the European Union
continued to believe that a human rights-based
approach was vital to ensure adequate priority for food
security and poverty eradication. It was the primary
responsibility of States, individually and through
international cooperation, to meet the vital food needs
of their people. Good governance and the enjoyment of
the full range of civil, cultural, economic, political and
social rights were all critical in ensuring food security
on a sustainable basis. The European Union therefore
believed that a human rights perspective, especially
women’s rights, should be mainstreamed in national
strategies for the realization of the right to adequate
food.
74. Referring to paragraph 15 of the draft resolution
and the concept of “food sovereignty”, he said that the
European Union supported a rules-based international
trading system and accepted the idea of differentiated
treatment of developing countries, but not the idea that
States could implement any policy that conflicted with
the rules-based international system. It believed that, in
taking a rights-based approach, the emphasis should
also be on strengthening entitlements and not only on
promoting food production.
Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.43/Rev.1: Protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism
75. Mr. De Leon Huerta (Mexico) said that, since
the introduction of the draft resolution, Andorra,
Belarus, Italy, Japan, Lithuania, Netherlands, Russian
Federation and San Marino had joined the sponsors.
76. Following consultations, a number of oral
revisions to the text had been made. In the seventh
preambular paragraph, the sixth line, the words “and
enhancing” should be deleted. In paragraph 13, the
fourth line, the rest of the sentence after “as the
fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism”
should be deleted. A new paragraph 13bis should be
included, which read: “Call upon the United Nations
entities involved in supporting counter-terrorism
efforts to continue to facilitate the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
as well as due process and the rule of law, while
countering terrorism;”. In paragraph 14, the fifth line,
the word “each” should be deleted; “the” should be
inserted before “working group”, which should be
made plural. In the last line, “its” should be replaced
by “their”. Lastly, in paragraph 19, the fifth line, the
phrase “including on good practices concerning
measures adopted in this regard” should be deleted.
77. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution as orally revised contained no
programme budget implications.
78. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Angola, Canada, Cape Verde, Egypt, India and
Ukraine had joined the sponsors.
79. Draft resolution A/C.3/65/L.43/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.