United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.23
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
6 January 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-55504 (E)
*1155504*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 23rd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 19 October 2011, at 10 a.m.
Chairman: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representativesA/C.3/66/SR.23
11-55504 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of
human rights (A/66/87)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (A/66/156, 161, 203, 204, 216, 225, 253,
254, 262, 264, 265, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 274,
283, 284, 285, 289, 290, 293, 310, 314, 325, 330,
342 and Add.1, and 372)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (A/66/267, 322,
343, 358, 361, 365, 374 and 518)
1. Ms. Pillay (United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights), introducing her annual report
(A/66/36) which focused primarily on the six thematic
priorities of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), said that the protest
movements in the Middle East and North Africa had
reaffirmed the reach of human rights in areas where
repression and a denial of rights once seemed
immutable conditions. Her Office had sought to
support the quest for civil, political, economic and
social rights at both the national level and in
international forums.
2. Where human rights mechanisms were
concerned, OHCHR welcomed the fact that all 193
Member States had participated in the universal
periodic review process. Her Office had provided
support to States in the preparation of the reviews and
proposed practical ways to follow up the
recommendations. More than 89 Member States had
extended standing invitations to special procedures, but
the mandate holders still faced difficulties in securing
approval to visit States, including some that had
extended invitations. She therefore urged the General
Assembly to encourage intensified dialogue at the
national, regional and international levels.
3. The number of treaty bodies had doubled over the
last 10 years with the corresponding increase in
accessions and reporting; the downside was that the
system was overloaded. Her Office was facilitating
dialogue among stakeholders to develop proposals for
strengthening the system. The Universal Human Rights
Index, an electronic tool managed by her Office, was
an innovative instrument for the study and advocacy of
the work of human rights mechanisms. It permitted
wide dissemination of the recommendations and
observations of the human rights treaty bodies and
special procedures to assist States in the
implementation of recommendations and to streamline
follow-up at the national level.
4. Her Office continued to draw attention to
discrimination and inequality, including discrimination
on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. In
June, the Human Rights Council had adopted
resolution 17/19 in that regard, requesting her Office to
commission a dedicated study to be released at the
Council’s nineteenth session. OHCHR had played a
leading role in the 2011 International Year for People
of African Descent, developing an office-wide
framework for action to combat discrimination against
Afro-descendants. It had launched a fellowship
programme aimed at empowering people of African
descent and provided technical assistance to five
countries for the development of national action plans
against racial discrimination.
5. The twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration
on the Right to Development had been commemorated
recently, inspiring activities to advance the right to
development that would continue beyond 2011. In
pursuing its task of promoting human rights in the
context of migration, her Office highlighted the
situation of all migrants, including irregular migrants,
whose human rights were routinely violated.
6. With regard to combating impunity, and
protecting human rights in the context of armed
conflict and insecurity, OHCHR had led the efforts of
the United Nations in the field of transitional justice, a
key element of post-conflict situations to ensure that
violence was neither condoned nor perpetuated through
impunity. In that regard, her Office had provided
technical advice to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on a draft law for the establishment of special
chambers for the prosecution of violations of
international human rights law and humanitarian law.
Human rights education was important as a means to
combat impunity and strengthen accountability, the
rule of law and democracy. The Office had
implemented human rights education programmes,
provided assistance to Governments, institutions and
civil society, and developed related tools in that field.
7. Recent developments in various countries of the
Middle East and North Africa and other situations,
such as those in the Sudan and Côte d’Ivoire, hadA/C.3/66/SR.23
3 11-55504
highlighted the critical need to develop sustainable
ways to prevent the escalation of violence and protect
civilians promptly and effectively. In addition, in an
increasing number of countries, large-scale violent
crime also exacted an enormous toll on human rights.
However, the fight against crime, if not carried out in
full respect for human rights, could result in further
attacks on the rights of those that OHCHR sought to
protect.
8. In conclusion, in the face of the towering
challenges and escalating expectations, it had become
increasingly difficult for the Office to keep pace with
the multiplication of mandates and requests for
assistance. The General Assembly’s decision to
consider ways to make essential resources speedily
available in response to urgent and time-sensitive
mandates created by the Human Rights Council was a
welcome measure. The support of all Member States
was necessary to ensure that the human rights
programme truly constituted the third pillar of the
United Nations and responded to the legitimate
demands of people in all parts of the world.
9. Mr. Kamau (Kenya), speaking on behalf of the
African Group, said that the Group was grateful to the
High Commissioner for her engagement with human
rights in Africa and worldwide and underlined its
support and commitment to international human rights.
Nevertheless, it was dismayed by the historical bias of
the Office of the High Commissioner towards civil and
political rights, at the expense of economic, social and
cultural rights. The Group would have liked to have
seen proposals for a more robust engagement with
regard to the latter that promoted synergies between
the two interrelated sets of rights. Development and
respect for human rights were interdependent, and
human rights could not be guaranteed in an
environment of abject poverty, hunger and disease.
10. Many human rights instruments imposed onerous
obligations that required expertise at the national and
regional levels. The Office should enhance its
capability to provide the necessary technical assistance
and support to Member States when requested.
Furthermore, the staff composition of OHCHR should
reflect the full diversity of the human race. Africa had
consistently insisted that the imbalance in its
composition had a negative impact on the Office’s
effectiveness and delayed the collective attainment of
human rights.
11. While appreciating efforts to eliminate
discrimination and acts of violence against any
individual, the African Group was concerned about
attempts to undermine international human rights by
seeking to impose concepts or notions pertaining to
social issues that fell outside the framework of the
human rights system, and that resources were being
expended on such issues to the detriment of the
internationally recognized rights such as those to
development and to food. The Office should act with
restraint until all Member States had defined the scope
and application of such notions.
12. No State could claim to have fulfilled all its
human rights obligations. At times, the highly
politicized approach to dealing with human rights
issues jeopardized the realization of human rights
worldwide. The promotion and protection of human
rights involved more than identifying so-called
wrongdoers or exhorting culprits to improve their
performance. Genuine improvement required a
measure of historical perspective and humility,
political commitment, cultural sensitivity, resources
and long-term effort in areas such as education, health
care, poverty and hunger eradication, as well as
institution-building and strengthening. To that end, the
African Group called for increased support and
genuine partnership with both OHCHR and the
international community.
13. Mr. Mac-Donald (Suriname) said that his
country appreciated the guidance received from the
Office of the High Commissioner during the universal
periodic review process and also hoped that OHCHR
would support the initiative to erect a permanent
memorial to transatlantic slavery at United Nations
Headquarters in New York. He asked whether the
Office would be initiating new programmes to assist
Member States achieve Millennium Development
Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women.
Also, the High Commissioner had mentioned that she
was providing technical advice on the draft law for
prosecution of violations of international human rights
law. It would be interesting to know whether the law
would apply to United Nations peacekeepers who
committed human rights violations while involved in
peacekeeping operations.
14. Ms. Morgan (Mexico) said that Mexico
supported the thematic priorities of the Office of the
High Commissioner and would be interested to have
information on some of the actions that OHCHR wasA/C.3/66/SR.23
11-55504 4
undertaking to prevent the violation of the human
rights of migrants.
15. Ms. Morch Smith (Norway) said that her country
welcomed the Office’s leading role within the United
Nations system with regard to transitional justice and
would like to know how OHCHR was working with
other United Nations agencies to ensure a coordinated
and coherent approach to the rule of law and
accountability. Norway strongly supported the focus on
human rights violations, including discrimination
based on sexual orientation or gender identity. It
looked forward to the study requested in Human Rights
Council resolution 17/19 and would like to know how
Member States could support the High Commissioner
in moving that agenda forward.
16. Full respect for the independence of OHCHR was
of paramount importance to ensure that it remained an
objective and strong voice against human rights
violations. Member States had the responsibility to
ensure that essential resources were made available so
that the Office could respond to the urgent and time-
sensitive mandates created by the Human Rights
Council.
17. Ms. Bouhamidi (Morocco) said that her country
welcomed the special attention paid to the right to
development in the High Commissioner’s report and
would appreciate an update on the activities planned by
the Office to celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Declaration of the Right to Development. The
Human Rights Council’s special procedures made a
valuable contribution to the promotion and protection
of human rights; and the universal periodic review
mechanism was of tremendous importance in helping
States improve their human rights situation on the
ground. On the issue of strengthening the treaty body
system, Morocco proposed that the High
Commissioner address the General Assembly, through
a side event or an informal briefing, to launch a
discussion among Member States.
18. Mr. Yahiaoui (Algeria) asked the High
Commissioner to comment on the role that her Office
could play to ensure that the special procedures
respected their mandates, as well as on a code of
conduct, in order to safeguard their independence and
ensure that their work was based on trust and
cooperation with Member States and avoided
politicization. Algeria welcomed the consultations on
the opening of country and regional offices undertaken
by OHCHR with the States concerned. It would be
interesting to know whether the plan for the new
regional offices provided for equitable geographical
distribution of the people staffing them.
19. When referring to the protection of the human
rights of migrants, the High Commissioner had not
mentioned the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, which had been ratified,
above all, by countries of origin. It would be useful to
know what the Office was doing to promote the
universal ratification of the Convention.
20. Ms. Zolotova (Russian Federation) said that the
events of the Arab Spring had significantly added to
the work of OHCHR. The issue of providing unplanned
financial resources, especially with regard to decisions
of the Human Rights Council, had not yet been
decided. She wished to know how the High
Commissioner was dealing with the situation. The
single meeting with Member States in Sion,
Switzerland, was insufficient to elaborate adequate
decisions to overcome the current situation of the
treaty bodies. The High Commissioner should provide
information on her plans to advance the reflection
process.
21. Mention had been made of indexing the
recommendations of the universal periodic review and
other mechanisms in order to help Governments
implement them. It would be useful to know which
recommendations would be included and how the
index would assist implementation. While agreeing that
human rights violations should not remain in impunity,
the main focus of the work of OHCHR should be on
enhancing dialogue with Member States in order to
improve their collaboration. The High Commissioner’s
mandate should not be re-focused from a policy of
assisting States in the area of human rights to the
function of international judge.
22. Mr. de Bustamante (Observer for the European
Union), while commending the work of the Office of
the High Commissioner in responding to the dramatic
changes and evolving situations in the Middle East and
North Africa, expressed deep dismay at the worsening
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic and hoped that
authorities would heed the call to cooperate with the
international commission of enquiry appointed by the
Human Rights Council. Information would be
appreciated on the establishment of a regional officeA/C.3/66/SR.23
5 11-55504
for North Africa. His delegation would welcome the
High Commissioner’s views on how to further
reinforce the integration of human rights and the peace
and security pillar of the United Nations. More
information would also be welcome on future measures
for strengthening the treaty body system.
23. Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) said that efforts to
ensure the right to development should not be limited
to the celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Declaration, but should increase the focus on
economic, social and cultural rights to help developing
countries achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
As requested, the Office should submit a strategic
management plan mentioning the source and
distribution of resources for the consideration of the
Human Rights Council and listen to the views of all
countries so as to obtain a broad consensus. To fulfil its
role in investigating human rights violations, OHCHR
should abide by the respective authorization of the
Human Rights Council; adhere to the principles of
impartiality, objectivity and neutrality; respect
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and promote
political dialogue with all parties concerned.
24. Ms. Freedman (United Kingdom) commended
the Office on its extremely active role in highlighting
human rights violations, especially in the Syrian Arab
Republic, and called on the Syrian Government to
immediately cease all human rights violations and
protect the Syrian people. The Council had also acted
decisively in promoting and protecting human rights
through its ground-breaking resolution 17/19 on human
rights, sexual orientation and gender identity and the
special sessions on Côte d’Ivoire, Libya and the Syrian
Arab Republic. The special procedures were an
essential resource in addressing situations of concern,
but they continued to face difficulties in arranging
visits to some States. In particular, the United Kingdom
called on the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to facilitate access for the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in that country.
25. The United Kingdom attached great importance
to the treaty bodies and hoped that the High
Commissioner would give them the high priority that
they deserved when allocating resources. It looked
forward to her proposals to strengthen the system
without adding significant resource requirements and
also hoped that attention would be given to national
selection processes for treaty body members so as to
encourage States to nominate members who were
independent from the Government and had the required
expertise to assist States with the implementation of
their respective obligations.
26. Mr. Al-Yafei (United Arab Emirates), speaking
on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference Group, said that the member States of the
Group had worked to enable the United Nations system
to take measures for the protection of human rights,
including in areas under foreign occupation. Regarding
the High Commissioner’s reference to sexual
orientation, the Group was seriously concerned at the
attempt to introduce in the United Nations an
undefined notion with no legal foundation in any
international human rights instrument and to focus on
certain individuals on the grounds of their sexual
preferences and behaviour, while ignoring widespread
intolerance and discrimination based on other factors,
including xenophobia. Individuals were not inherently
vulnerable, but were made vulnerable owing to their
socio-economic circumstances.
27. The Group considered that an attempt was being
made to impose undefined notions on the wider
membership of the United Nations without any legal
foundation or internationally agreed definition of its
scope. Consequently, its member States rejected the
High Commissioner’s statement and the references in
her report with regard to such notions and would like
such references in a formal report of a United Nations
body to be avoided in the future.
28. Ms. Horsington (Australia) said that her
delegation would be interested to hear the High
Commissioner’s view on what she expected from the
second round of the universal periodic review process
and on the types of follow-up or information-sharing
mechanisms that could be established to evaluate the
performance of individual countries.
29. Mr. Tagle (Chile) said that Chile supported all
measures to eliminate discrimination, including the
initiative to erect a memorial to transatlantic slavery.
Migrant workers were particularly affected by
discrimination, and Chile was working to implement
their rights. While reaffirming its commitment to the
Office of the High Commissioner, Chile would
appreciate further information on its future relationship
with other United Nations agencies, especially those
dealing with human rights issues.
30. Ms. Cavanagh (New Zealand) said that her
country remained a strong supporter of theA/C.3/66/SR.23
11-55504 6
independence and integrity of the High Commissioner
and her Office, which had risen to meet the
extraordinary array of human rights challenges over the
past year, and it welcomed efforts to integrate human
rights into all areas of the work of the United Nations.
She would therefore be interested in hearing the High
Commissioner’s views on further steps that could be
taken to integrate human rights into ongoing
discussions on the Millennium Development Goals. It
was evident that changes were required to the treaty
body system. Her delegation looked forward to the
High Commissioner’s forthcoming compilation of
proposals and would welcome comments on which
proposals she considered most useful for improving its
functioning.
31. Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein) asked what effect
the urgent human rights mandates entrusted to the High
Commissioner by the Human Rights Council had on
the OHCHR budget. Treaty body reform was most
efficiently and effectively carried out by the treaty
bodies themselves in close consultation with States
parties. Efforts should concentrate on specific practical
measures instead of engaging in intergovernmental
attempts to make sweeping changes. It would be useful
to know what the Office of the High Commissioner
considered were the most promising paths to reform
the treaty bodies. Liechtenstein was concerned that,
recently, human rights appeared to have been banished
from the mainstream of United Nations activities. Did
the High Commissioner share that assessment and, if
so, what could be done to turn the situation around?
32. Ms. Boutin (Canada) said that Canada remained
concerned about the human rights situation in various
places around the world, including the Islamic
Republic of Iran and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. The Canadian Government was establishing
an office of religious freedom within the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs to advance the right to freedom of
religion and conscience as a key objective of Canadian
foreign policy and would like to know what steps the
international community could take to advance that
right. In addition, Canada remained concerned that
some actors continued to misuse international
platforms to politicize anti-Semitic views and asked
what measures the international community should
focus on in order to effect positive change in that
regard.
33. Mr. Wrafter (Ireland) said that the High
Commissioner had referred to the strengthening of
treaty bodies in her report. Ireland would like to know
what the next steps would be in that process and also
looked forward to the study that OHCHR had been
mandated to prepare under Human Rights Council
resolution 17/19 on human rights, sexual orientation
and gender identity.
34. Mr. Minty (South Africa) said that, in the context
of the priority areas identified by the High
Commissioner for the budget year, support for the
special procedures and mechanisms remained crucial
for ensuring the protection and promotion of human
rights. South Africa regarded the United Nations treaty
body system as the keystone for ensuring that States
parties respected their obligations. Nevertheless, the
survival of the system was threatened by the failure of
States to sign and ratify core international human rights
instruments, the tendency to include reservations, and
lack of funding.
35. Regarding the study on discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation, it was imperative that the
panel to be convened facilitated dialogue on the issue,
rather than entrenching further divisions and
finger-pointing. Racism was rising in many countries
and regions. South Africa therefore welcomed the
efforts of OHCHR to translate the international
obligations under the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action into national laws, policies and
programmes.
36. It would be useful to have more information on
the proposed index of the universal periodic review
recommendations and how it would work in practice
and also on the level of support granted to date to the
High Commissioner’s Fellowship Programme for
People of African descent. Lastly, he asked whether
OHCHR had any plans to assist in the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals in the light of the
slowness of progress, especially in Africa.
37. Ms. Nemroff (United States of America) said that
her country was ready to work with the Office of the
High Commissioner and other Member States to ensure
that bureaucratic hurdles were not permitted to obstruct
the mandates of the commission of inquiry. Regarding
the Syrian Arab Republic, it was profoundly concerned
by the report of the fact-finding mission. She
welcomed the formation of a commission of inquiry
and strongly urged full cooperation by all members of
the international community.A/C.3/66/SR.23
7 11-55504
38. She requested further information on what could
be done to overcome the bureaucratic and budgetary
obstacles to the implementation of high-priority time-
sensitive activities mandated by the Human Rights
Council, such as fact-finding missions and
commissions of inquiry. Also, what steps could be
taken to increase cooperation between OHCHR and the
special rapporteurs and commissions of inquiries, and
what should be done when repeated requests for access
and cooperation were denied? Lastly, it would be
interesting to know whether there were any issues that
the High Commissioner believed should be taken up by
the Human Rights Council that were not on its agenda
currently.
39. Mr. Makanga (Gabon), endorsing the
observations made by Kenya with regard to the
importance of economic, social and cultural rights and
respect for an equitable geographical distribution in the
staffing of the Office of the High Commissioner, said
that human rights were increasingly important for
peace and security, particularly in regions affected by
crises and conflicts such as the subregion of Central
Africa, where there were multiple challenges.
40. The United Nations Subregional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa, which
celebrated its tenth anniversary in 2011, was a crucial
instrument for improving the observance of human
rights in the subregion. Its credibility and utility had
been firmly established. However, the Centre required
additional human and financial resources in order to
fulfil its mandate in light of the multiple crises and
conflicts in the subregion.
41. Mr. Omba Olenga (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) said that most human rights violations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo took place in the
eastern part of the country where there were foreign
armed groups, especially the Lord’s Resistance Army
and the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda.
His country was countering the activities of those
armed groups in order to ensure the observance of
human rights in that area and pledged its full support to
the Office of the High Commissioner in order to
re-establish peace and security there.
42. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) said that the report of
the High Commissioner referred to the supposed
intimidation or reprisals against those who cooperated
with the United Nations and its representatives in the
field of human rights. He asked how that could be
explained and whether there was perhaps a much
deeper cause for that reaction.
43. Benin considered it unacceptable that attempts
were being made to flout existing rights or to create
rights or introduce new concepts for which there was,
as yet, no content. The High Commissioner had
referred to the issue of discrimination, but appeared to
prefer dwelling on notions that did not appear in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. That was all
the more regrettable because, for developing countries,
the important issue was how to ensure the rights to
access to food, primary health care and housing. His
delegation did not deny the existence of sexual rights,
depending on their content, but considered that the
priority needs should be looked at more closely.
44. His country again wished to draw attention to
General Assembly resolutions 62/171 and 63/173 on
the International Year of Human Rights Learning and
would like to know why the resolutions had not been
mentioned in either the High Commissioner’s report or
presentation or in resolutions recently adopted by the
Council.
45. Ms. Mballa Eyenga (Cameroon), referring to the
report of the Secretary-General on the Subregional
Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central
Africa (A/66/325), said that Cameroon urged continued
support for the Centre in Yaoundé, which had helped
train personnel in charge of teaching democracy and
provided support to national institutions on human
rights and democracy. Although the report referred to
shortcomings that still existed in the promotion and
defence of human rights in Central Africa, her
delegation hoped the Committee would observe the
progress achieved by the Centre, as well as the
commitment of the countries of the subregion to
cooperate with the Centre towards the ideal of a culture
of peace.
46. Ms. Camino (Cuba) said that, during the
eighteenth session of Human Rights Council, Cuba had
sponsored resolution 18/6 to establish a new mandate
of independent expert on the promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order, which
had been submitted to the General Assembly for
adoption during the current session. That special
procedures mandate would contribute to strengthening
the work of OHCHR.
47. Cuba, like other developing countries, would
continue to advocate the right to development as anA/C.3/66/SR.23
11-55504 8
essential issue. It was not enough to merely mention
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
Declaration on the Right to Development. Specific
measures must be taken. Lastly, Cuba reiterated the
importance of observing the principles of objectivity
and impartiality in the work of the Human Rights
Council, as well as the importance of strengthening
cooperation in favour of human rights.
48. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that the technical
assistance tools of the Office of the High
Commissioner needed to be improved. His delegation
would appreciate the High Commissioner’s suggestions
in that regard; in particular, as to whether adequate
funding was being allocated for that purpose. A
transparent and open dialogue between the High
Commissioner, the Human Rights Council and the
Committee could play an important role in supporting
international efforts. Further cooperation and
consultation would be appreciated, and Egypt would
like to know how such an open dialogue could be
established with regard to the strategic framework of
OHCHR and the allocation of budgetary and
extrabudgetary resources.
49. Egypt welcomed the efforts made to strengthen
the treaty bodies and looked forward to further steps at
the intergovernmental level to reach a consensual
framework that would enable them to operate more
effectively and efficiently and to avoid duplication
with already-existing mechanisms such as the universal
periodic review.
50. Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that in
recent months his country had been subject to crimes
against it and its people committed by armed terrorist
groups, accompanied by an unprecedented media
campaign, supported by a number of Western
countries, with allegations targeting security, stability
and national unity aimed at undermining Syrian
institutions and the country as a whole.
51. The Syrian Arab Republic had welcomed a
United Nations delegation on humanitarian assistance
and had received the International Committee of the
Red Cross, which revealed that it had nothing to hide.
Moreover, the Government had repeatedly stated that it
was ready to receive the Human Rights Council’s
commission of inquiry after it had concluded a
comprehensive national investigation. His country had
presented its national report under the universal
periodic review in July 2011, which had been
supported by the majority of Council members and,
subsequently, it had adopted over 100
recommendations. Lastly, his Government was
disappointed that the High Commissioner had not
mentioned Israel’s occupation of Arab territories and
would like to know more about the measures that she
intended to take to promote the protection of human
rights in situations of conflict, especially the rights of
peoples under foreign occupation, in order to guarantee
the impartiality of her work.
52. Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
his Government believed in positive cooperation and
interaction with OHCHR to promote human rights and
to that end planned to invite the High Commissioner
and two special rapporteurs to visit the country in
2012. He stressed that the Office should retain its
unbiased approach and independence while operating
within the framework of the accepted principles of the
Human Rights Council and should cease to insist on
issues that were not internationally recognized human
rights norms and standards in its reports.
53. Ms. Pillay (United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights) said that the points raised provided
a very useful perspective and insight and that her goal
was to be transparent and provide information on all
the work of her Office. Some delegations had felt that
its work was biased in favour of civil and political
rights; however, over the past three years, she had
prioritized economic, social and cultural rights, as well
as the right to development, with several specific
activities. She did not act as an international judge, but
rather within the mandate and framework provided by
Member States. Although her efforts to monitor and
address human rights violations sometimes brought her
into confrontation with States, they were carried out in
a spirit of cooperation. For example, in the midst of
conflicts in Côte d’Ivoire, Yemen, Tunisia, Egypt and
Libya, members of her Office had been invited to visit
those countries and provide assistance.
54. Since assuming office, she had tried to improve
the geographical diversity in staffing and asked
delegations to observe the trend in overall geographical
representation. In particular, there had been a distinct
improvement in the recruitment of candidates from
Africa. She appreciated the expressions of support for
the independence of her Office and believed that it
should work closely with the Human Rights Council to
better protect and promote human rights. While there
should be clarity and transparency in what OHCHRA/C.3/66/SR.23
9 11-55504
was doing, as part of the United Nations Secretariat, its
reporting obligations were to the Secretary-General and
to the General Assembly.
55. The Office’s regular budget amounted to less than
3 per cent of the regular budget of the United Nations,
which was scandalous, since human rights was one of
the Organization’s three pillars. The constant addition
of mandates and the necessary shifting of priorities to
implement them made financial planning and
management difficult and could not continue,
especially with regard to the number of urgent
fact-finding missions. A report was being submitted
during the current session of the General Assembly
which included as options: a review of mandates and
resource requirements immediately following each
session; immediate access to a regular budget
contingency fund; establishment of a human rights
contingency fund, and access to the unforeseen and
extraordinary expenses mechanism.
56. Some delegations had asked how her Office had
been able to cover additional expenses. A contingency
fund based on voluntary contributions enabled it to
respond to crisis situations, but the fund had been fully
depleted earlier in the year due to the missions to
Tunisia, Egypt and Yemen and the commissions of
inquiry that she had been mandated to support for
Libya and Côte d’Ivoire. The contingency fund had
been replenished with non-earmarked voluntary
contributions to maintain a rapid response capability;
however, it had again been depleted, and she was very
worried about the financial situation. Although some
States had made a significant commitment to cooperate
with the special procedures, more needed to be done.
She considered that pledges by States seeking
membership on the Council could include such
commitments, and the General Assembly could
encourage the Council to follow up on such pledges
regularly.
57. On assuming office, each mandate-holder was
provided with the Code of Conduct, available on the
Internet, and also had to sign a solemn declaration
included in the Code. Her staff regularly drew
mandate-holders’ attention to their responsibilities.
Concerns about the conduct of mandate-holders should
be referred to the special procedures Coordination
Committee under the internal advisory procedure, so
that all sides could clarify any allegations concerning
exceeding the mandate.
58. She had regularly called for ratification of all
treaties, including the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, which had resulted in a
large number of ratifications. Over the past five years
the treaty body system had doubled in size, mainly due
to the entry into force of new treaties and the increased
number of committees. The treaty bodies were in crisis,
particularly with regard to funding. Proposals to rectify
the situation had been made by various stakeholders;
nevertheless, suggestions regarding more efficient
working conditions should come from the committee
members themselves. A two-day workshop on the
matter had been held in Switzerland with some
90 Member States together with the heads of all nine
treaty bodies. She hoped to have a similar dialogue in
New York.
59. The second cycle of the universal periodic review
would examine implementation of the more than
14,000 recommendations from the previous exercise
when the human rights situation in 193 States had been
reviewed. The Universal Human Rights Index, which
should have been brought up to date before the second
cycle, would be the only online tool that compiled
recommendations from all human rights mechanisms
and would permit the recommendations from all parts
of the human rights system to be compared and
analysed.
60. The Arab Spring had emphasized that the concern
of people on the street was poverty, food and
employment as well as democracy and political
participation. The Office had continued to increase
relevant activities to further promote and protect
economic, social and cultural rights. In 2011, it had
produced a report on indicators for monitoring the
economic, social and cultural rights of migrants. It had
also organized a consultation on land and human rights
and a workshop on transitional justice processes.
61. Her Office would continue to provide technical
advice to national partners through its field presence in
56 countries. Requests to the Office had increased
almost sevenfold and she hoped to respond to them as
fully as possible. On the issue of integrating human
rights into peace and security, OHCHR worked closely
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Political Affairs and had a long
record of collaboration on integrated missions.A/C.3/66/SR.23
11-55504 10
62. In conclusion, with regard to the concerns raised
about sexual orientation and gender identity, she said
that, as a human rights challenge, the issue should not
be controversial. Her Office was not trying to create
new rights, but merely to highlight that everyone was
entitled to the same rights and to equal protection as
established under the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. She looked forward to discussing the issue
constructively with all Member States during panel
discussion on the study that she had been mandated to
prepare and was convinced that, if the focus was on the
violations perpetrated against those who were gay,
lesbian, bisexual or transgender, there would be
increasing support for action to address such problems
more effectively.
63. Mr. Nambiar (Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Myanmar) introduced the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation of human
rights in Myanmar (A/66/267) and described the latest
developments in the situation in the country, noting
that the Secretary-General had remained personally
engaged on the issue at all times. On the political front,
the most significant event had been the first meeting
between the President and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
since 2002 following the latter’s first political trip
outside Yangon since her release from house arrest.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi had publicly expressed her
confidence in the President’s reform intentions and had
held three rounds of talks with the Minister for Social
Welfare, which included discussions on the granting of
amnesty, peacebuilding, and cooperation to ensure law
and order. The Minister had stated that the Government
was willing to cooperate with the National League for
Democracy after it had completed the legal registration
procedure.
64. Since then, around 220 political prisoners had
been released as part of an amnesty granted by the
President, channelled through Parliament with the
support of the military faction in the legislature. While
welcoming that development, the Secretary-General
had called for the release of all political prisoners. In
parallel, the President had invited ethnic armed groups
to enter into peace talks with their respective regional
or state governments, and an official peace committee
had been established to resolve ethnic conflicts. As a
result, two peace agreements had been concluded.
Overcoming Myanmar’s painful history of civil
conflict was a necessary condition for establishing the
peace and stability needed for development.
65. There had also been significant political activity,
and a large number of bills had been submitted to the
new Parliament, including by opposition parties on
politically sensitive issues. Three related developments
revealed the steady pace at which reform efforts
appeared to be taking hold. First, the agreement to take
up a bill for amending the Political Parties Registration
Law, following concerns that arose from the last
elections. The by-election for 48 legislative seats in
November would test how far the Government was
ready to go towards ensuring a more inclusive political
process. Second, the recent enactment of a new labour
law guaranteeing the right to form and join unions and
to strike. If correctly implemented, it had the potential
to make a major contribution to the country’s social,
economic and political development. Third, the
introduction of a new media law aimed at correcting
existing legal restrictions to freedom of the press. In
that regard, several foreign and exiled journalists had
been allowed to visit Myanmar and to cover
parliamentary proceedings.
66. The pace of domestic developments had
coincided with a renewed engagement of Myanmar and
the international community. Much had happened in
Myanmar that gave reason to believe that real
prospects for change existed. Nonetheless, the scale of
the challenges that lay ahead had to be considered. If
not properly managed, the stresses and expectations
inherent in any transition could exacerbate rather than
solve existing problems. All parties needed to redouble
their efforts to strengthen national unity, implement the
promised reforms and address the serious challenges
facing the country. Achieving a credible transition from
military rule to a civilian and democratic system would
require the Government and other stakeholders to
avoid the pitfalls and maximize the opportunities
accompanying a transformation of such magnitude and
complexity. In addition, the international community
would need to increase its action to support and
reinforce the changes.
67. The United Nations shared the perception of
many, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, that change
was possible. All Member States had a stake in seeing
Myanmar succeed in introducing further reforms and
democratization. The United Nations was committed to
a policy of comprehensive engagement with the
Government and people of Myanmar in the areas of
political, humanitarian and development assistance.
However, the United Nations system would be evenA/C.3/66/SR.23
11 11-55504
better placed to help if the existing restrictions on its
operations were removed.
68. Mr. Thant Kyaw (Myanmar) said that, over the
past year, Myanmar had undergone significant changes
as regards its adherence to democratic values, which
had attracted the positive attention of the international
community. Elected representatives were exercising
their democratic rights in the legislative bodies, and
parliamentary debates were being reported onto the
people by both official and private media. The
Government had made it clear that citizens could
participate freely in the political process and was
working towards a peaceful solution with national
armed groups. A series of socio-economic reforms had
been undertaken that included increasing salaries,
overhauling public health care and social security,
raising education and health standards, amending press
laws, promoting environmental conservation and
enhancing measures to respond to natural disasters.
69. Myanmar valued its cooperation with the United
Nations and would continue to strengthen it. He hoped
that the country programme of the United Nations
Development Programme would be resumed in the near
future. Although challenges remained, the process of
democratization would move forward in a dynamic and
sustainable manner with the cooperation of the
international community.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.