United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.42
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
7 February 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-58360 (E)
*1158360*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 42nd meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 8 November 2011, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff Hussein. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (continued)
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(b) Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women
and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly (continued)A/C.3/66/SR.42
11-58360 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 62: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.67: Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
1. Mr. Jafarov (Azerbaijan), introducing the draft
resolution and speaking also on behalf of Rwanda, said
that enlargement of the Executive Committee had been
requested in letters from the two delegations dated
March and July 2011, and that the Economic and Social
Council had expressed its position on the enlargement
of the Executive Committee in its decision 263/2011.
2. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Afghanistan, Denmark, Egypt and Peru
had joined the list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.63: Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
3. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
4. Ms. Rasmussen (Denmark), introducing the draft
resolution, said that its main purpose was to safeguard
the rights and well-being of refugees.
5. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Argentina, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational Republic of). Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, the Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Guatemala, Honduras, Israel, Jamaica, Japan,
the Kyrgyz Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Morocco, the Niger, Peru, the Philippines,
Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, Thailand, Timor-
Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay and Zambia had joined the list of
sponsors.
6. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.63 was adopted
without a vote.
7. Mr. Al-Nsour (Jordan), speaking in explanation
of position, said that his delegation had joined the
consensus despite deletion of the reference to Iraqi
refugees being hosted by neighbouring countries and
the generosity of those countries in providing necessary
services despite challenging economic conditions.
While in some countries the number of Iraqi refugees
had decreased, Jordan was still hosting large numbers
of Iraqis and continued to require significant assistance
and cooperation from the Office of the High
Commissioner for Refugees and other agencies.
8. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
explanation of position, said that her delegation had
joined the consensus despite the absence of a reference
to the efforts by the Government of Iraq to provide for
the safe return and reintegration of displaced Iraqi
citizens and measures taken by neighbouring countries
to help Iraqi refugees. Her country was still hosting
large numbers of refugees and treated them as brothers.
Its resources were limited but it was rich in compassion
and hospitality and was cooperating in efforts to help
Iraqis return home with dignity after the complete
withdrawal of foreign forces from their country or to
help them settle in third countries.
9. Mr. Al-Obaidi (Iraq), speaking in explanation of
position, said that his delegation had sought to delete
the reference to refugees from Iraq because it did not
reflect the situation in Iraq. Statistics indicated that the
number of Iraqi refugees and displaced persons had
decreased significantly. Refugees and displaced
persons were a priority for the Government of Iraq.
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.60: Inadmissibility
of certain practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
10. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation),
introducing the draft resolution, said that Mauritania
and the Seychelles had joined the list of sponsors.
Regrettably, the draft resolution remained highly
relevant. The victory of the Allies in the Second World
War had undeniably represented the victory of good
over evil and resulted in the contemporary system of
protection and promotion of human rights.
11. It was unacceptable to make those involved in
Nazi crimes into heroes. Recently, the dedication ofA/C.3/66/SR.42
3 11-58360
monuments to Nazis had become a regular occurrence
in some countries, and anniversaries of liberation from
the Nazis had been declared days of mourning. In some
cases, people who had spoken out against forgetting
those who had fought against fascism during the
Second World War had been arrested, and those who
had fought alongside the fascists had been described as
participating in national liberation movements.
Recently a central thoroughfare in a European town
had been renamed in honour of a Waffen SS battalion
which had slaughtered civilians, including babies and
the elderly.
12. The Nuremburg Tribunal had established
unambiguously who represented the force of good and
who the force of evil during the Second World War.
Attempts to revisit that position were blasphemy.
13. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Côte d’Ivoire, the Niger and
Uzbekistan had joined the list of sponsors.
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.61: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
14. Mr. Selim (Egypt), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Albania, Andorra, Austria, Bulgaria,
Cape Verde, Cyprus, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, the
Gambia, Greece, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Malta, Myanmar, Norway, Oman, South Africa,
Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland had joined the list of sponsors. Except
for some technical updates, the text of the draft
resolution was the same as that of the previous session.
15. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Chile, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, the
Kyrgyz Republic, Latvia, Mali, Monaco, the Niger,
Nigeria, the Republic of Moldova and Romania had
joined the list of sponsors.
16. Ms. Morgan-Moss (Panama) noted that her
country’s name had been included in the list of
sponsors on the draft resolution in error. Panama was
not a sponsor of the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.62: Use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
17. Ms. Acosta (Cuba), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Algeria, China, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ecuador, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the
Russian Federation and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines had joined the list of sponsors.
18. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Comoros, Egypt, Madagascar, Mali,
Namibia, the Niger, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Viet Nam
and Zimbabwe had joined the list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.30: Universal realization of
the right of peoples to self-determination
19. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
20. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Timor-Leste had been erroneously
listed as a sponsor.
21. Mr. Tarar (Pakistan), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Belize, Guyana, Jamaica, Lesotho,
Mali and Mozambique had joined the sponsors. The
adoption of the resolution by acclamation since its
introduction in the 1980s clearly communicated the
opposition of the international community to all acts of
foreign aggression and occupation.
22. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.30 was adopted
without a vote.
23. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking on behalf of
the European Union in explanation of position, said
that the thrust of the draft resolution was too narrow. It
should have reflected more clearly the practice of self-
determination under international law. The text
contained inaccuracies; the right to self-determination
as stated in the international covenants attached only to
peoples, not to nations. Moreover, self-determination
was closely associated with respect for all human rights.
It was not correct to suggest that self-determination was
a precondition for enjoyment of other human rights.
24. The right to return should have been reflected in
accordance with article 13, paragraph 2, of the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights. It was hoped
that in future years, the text would be a more effective
instrument for encouraging all States to respect their
obligations in that area.A/C.3/66/SR.42
11-58360 4
25. Ms. Robles (Spain), speaking in explanation of
position, said that there were cases of colonized
territories where the rights of the people in the territory
were not violated. The principle of self-determination
was not the only principle relevant to decolonization of
territories which were not independent. There were
cases, as had been established in various General
Assembly resolutions, where the principle of territorial
integrity applied. Gibraltar was one such case. The
original population of the colony had been forced to
abandon the territory, so there could be no claim to the
right of self-determination by the colonizing people.
The right to self-determination applied to colonized
people.
26. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina), speaking in
explanation of position, said that his Government fully
supported the right to self-determination of peoples
under colonial domination or foreign occupation.
However, that right must be understood in the light of
successive United Nations resolutions on the subject,
including those that expressly recognized the question
of the Malvinas Islands as a special and particular
colonial situation involving a sovereignty dispute
between Argentina and the United Kingdom. The
Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas
were illegitimately occupied by the United Kingdom,
which had expelled the Argentine people and
authorities peacefully residing there and replaced them
with their own subjects. Thus, self-determination was
not applicable, and the principle of territorial integrity
must be applied.
27. Ms. Nemroff (United States of America), speaking
in explanation of position, said that the draft resolution
contained many misstatements of international law and
was inconsistent with current State practice.
28. Mr. Preston (United Kingdom), speaking in
explanation of position, said that his Government had
no doubts about its sovereignty over Gibraltar and the
territorial waters surrounding it and did not accept that
the principle of territorial integrity had ever been
applicable to the decolonization of Gibraltar. The
existence of a sovereignty dispute did not imply that
the people of Gibraltar did not have the right of self-
determination. The United Kingdom would never enter
into arrangements whereby the people of Gibraltar
would pass under the sovereignty of another State
against their wishes.
29. The United Kingdom had no doubt about its
sovereignty over the Falkland Islands, South Georgia
and the South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding
maritime areas. The principle of self-determination as
set out in Article 1, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations and article 1 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights underlay its
position on the Falkland Islands. There could be no
negotiations on the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands
unless and until the islanders so wished.
30. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina), speaking in
explanation of position, said that the Malvinas Islands,
South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and
the surrounding maritime areas had been illegally
occupied by the United Kingdom. Several international
organizations had recognized that they were the subject
of a sovereignty dispute, and numerous General
Assembly resolutions had urged the Governments of
Argentina and the United Kingdom to resume
negotiations to find a peaceful and lasting solution
without delay. Argentina reaffirmed its legitimate right
to sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands, South
Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas, which were part and
parcel of Argentine national territory.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of
human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.31: The universal,
indivisible, interrelated, interdependent and
mutually reinforcing nature of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms
31. Mr. Mashabane (South Africa), speaking also on
behalf of Brazil and India, introduced the draft
resolution.
32. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Côte d’Ivoire and Nigeria had joined
the list of sponsors.A/C.3/66/SR.42
5 11-58360
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.37: Strengthening
United Nations action in the field of human rights
through the promotion of international cooperation
and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality
and objectivity
33. Ms. Acosta (Cuba), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Algeria, China, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Myanmar, Namibia,
the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Turkmenistan, Viet Nam and
Zimbabwe had joined the list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.38: The right to food
34. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) made
an editorial correction to paragraph 39 of the draft
resolution.
35. Ms. Acosta (Cuba), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Algeria, Australia, China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Ecuador, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Mexico, the Russian Federation, Turkmenistan
and Ukraine had joined the list of sponsors.
36. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belize, Benin, Botswana, Cameroon, the Comoros,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, the Kyrgyz
Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Morocco, Namibia, the
Niger, Paraguay, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia and
Zimbabwe had joined the list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.39: Promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order
37. Ms. Acosta (Cuba), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Algeria, China, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ecuador, the Lao Democratic People’s Republic,
Myanmar and the Russian Federation had joined the
list of sponsors. The draft resolution had been updated
to include a mention of the creation of a new mandate
in the Human Rights Council for an independent expert
on the promotion of a democratic and equitable
international order.
38. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bangladesh, Botswana, the Comoros,
Egypt, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, the
Niger, Senegal, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe had joined
the list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.41: Globalization and its
impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
39. Mr. Selim (Egypt), introducing the draft
resolution, said that Cape Verde, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Grenada, the
Gambia, the Philippines, Rwanda, South Africa,
Tunisia, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet
Nam had joined the list of sponsors.
40. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Azerbaijan, Cuba, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti and Mali
had joined the list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.47: Combating intolerance,
negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination,
incitement to violence and violence against persons,
based on religion or belief
41. Mr. Al-Yafei (United Arab Emirates), introducing
the draft resolution on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC), said that the Organization
welcomed Human Rights Council resolution 16/18 of
the same name, recently adopted by consensus in
Geneva. That resolution was a landmark.
42. The draft resolution was based on the resolution
recommended by the Human Rights Council in its
annual report. It complemented the traditional
resolution presented by the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and adopted by the General Assembly
since 1999.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.48: Elimination of all forms
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion
or belief
43. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), introducing the draft
resolution and speaking on behalf of the European
Union, said that defending freedom of religion or belief
and countering such intolerance was a priority of
European Union human rights policy. The resolution
was in line with that commitment, which had been
confirmed at the highest political level.
44. He announced an editorial correction to the fourth
line of operative paragraph 16.A/C.3/66/SR.42
11-58360 6
45. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the United Republic of Tanzania had
joined the list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.49: National institutions
for the promotion and protection of human rights
46. Mr. Schroeer (Germany), introducing the draft
resolution, said that the Republic of Korea and the
United States of America had joined the list of
sponsors. National human rights institutions existed in
some 80 countries, and 67 of those had A status, which
meant that they were in compliance with the Paris
Principles. Compliance with the Paris Principles was
vetted by a peer review mechanism consisting of
elected representatives of other national human rights
institutions. Updates to the resolution, contained in
paragraphs 10 and 16, reflected the enhanced
participatory rights of national human rights
institutions in the Human Rights Council. Inputs of
such institutions to the universal periodic review were
now reflected in a separate section of the summary of
stakeholder information. The national human rights
institutions could make statements immediately after
the State under review at the universal periodic review
and after the States concerned during the presentation
of country mission reports under special procedures.
47. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Andorra, Armenia, Bangladesh, Chile,
Guatemala, Iceland, Madagascar, Mongolia, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia and
Turkey had joined the list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.50: International Day of
the Girl
48. Mr. Rishchynski (Canada), introducing the draft
resolution and speaking also on behalf of Peru and
Turkey, said that an International Day of the Girl
would raise awareness of girls’ daily struggles,
including discrimination, violence and barriers in
access to education and health care and would help
girls improve the lives of their communities and
societies. It would ensure that girls received
recognition as key actors in achieving equality and
empowerment. It would help raise girls’ awareness of
their rights, making their achievement more likely.
49. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Belgium, Georgia, Hungary, Iceland,
Jamaica, Liechtenstein and the Maldives had joined the
list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.51: Protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism
50. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico), introducing the
draft resolution, said that Colombia, Liechtenstein and
Peru had joined the list of sponsors. The obligation of
States to respect human rights in combating terrorism
was, in addition to being a position of principle, the
only way to assure the efficacy and legitimacy of
counter-terrorism measures. An area of major
importance was ensuring respect for the rights of
persons deprived of their liberty and ensuring that
people were never beyond the protection of the law.
51. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Armenia, Benin, Iceland, Mali, Monaco
and Paraguay had joined the list of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.53: Follow-up to the
International Year of Human Rights Learning
52. Mr. Babadoudou (Benin), introducing the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of African States and
the other sponsors, in particular Brazil, the Republic of
Korea and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, said that
the draft resolution contained a new preambular
paragraph reaffirming the universality of all human
rights and stating that human rights learning could
contribute to an understanding of the relation of human
rights to people’s daily lives. The goal of human rights
learning was to form responsible citizens who knew
their rights and the limits of those rights.
53. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Belize and Turkey had joined the list of
sponsors.
Agenda item 27: Social development (continued)
(b) Social development: including questions
relating to the world social situation and
to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the
family (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.7/Rev.1: Policies and
programmes involving youth
54. The Chair said that he had been advised that the
draft resolution had no programme budget implications.A/C.3/66/SR.42
7 11-58360
55. Ms. Vaz Patto (Portugal), introducing the draft
resolution and speaking also on behalf of the Republic
of Moldova and Senegal, said that Andorra, Argentina,
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Finland, France, Grenada, India, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malaysia, Mexico, the Netherlands, Peru, Poland, San
Marino, Spain, Sri Lanka, Uruguay, Thailand, Turkey
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland had joined the list of sponsors. She made
editorial corrections to the sixth preambular paragraph
and operative paragraphs 10, 13 and 16.
56. The draft focused on how various difficulties
currently facing young people around the world
compromised their autonomy at a crucial phase of
transition to adult life.
57. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Armenia, Australia, the
Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational Republic of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Chile, the Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Eritrea,
El Salvador, Georgia, Honduras, Iceland, Jamaica,
Japan, Lebanon, Liberia, Madagascar, Mali, Nicaragua,
the Niger, Nigeria, Paraguay, the Philippines, Sierra
Leone, South Africa and Togo had joined the list of
sponsors.
58. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.7 Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted without a vote.
59. Ms. Abubakar (Libya), speaking in explanation
of position, expressed regret that certain parties had
taken the extreme and unjustified step of rejecting a
paragraph proposed by Egypt, Libya and Tunisia
mentioning the role of youth in those countries’
transitional periods. The young people of the countries
referred to had exercised their right to freedom of
expression and demonstrated for justice, peace, social
equality and decent employment opportunities, housing
and education. Because the former regimes had been
unresponsive, their ouster had become necessary. The
young people who had rid Libya of a dictatorship were
a source of pride.
60. Ms. Nemroff (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of position, expressed deep
disappointment with the insistence of some Member
States on inclusion of a paragraph on young people
living under foreign occupation, which politicized the
draft resolution and detracted from its central theme.
Most disturbing was the fact that those same countries
had blocked references to the role of young people in
bringing about transformational change in their own
societies through exercise of freedom of expression,
assembly and association.
61. The compelling experiences of the Arab Spring
were a reminder that inclusive political processes
addressing the legitimate aspirations and concerns of
the population, including youth, were the only solution
to political crises.
62. Ms. Dali (Tunisia), speaking in explanation of
position, referred to the paragraph proposed by her
delegation. Its purpose had been to pay tribute to the
young people of her country who had taken their
destiny in hand to establish genuine democracy. Some
young people had sacrificed their lives so that that
value would prevail. Young people had been the motor
and catalyst of the revolution, and they deserved a
special tribute.
63. Ms. Fahmy (Egypt), speaking in explanation of
position, said that the proposal presented jointly by the
delegations of Egypt, Libya and Tunisia had been
carefully drafted to avoid raising concerns for any
delegation. Opposition voiced by a few delegations out
of concern that the call for support to youth and
mention of those three countries might encourage
youth to work to achieve transformational change in
their societies was groundless. Young people would
continue to work for those changes whether or not that
paragraph was adopted.
64. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking in
explanation of position, said that introducing the
suffering of youth under foreign occupation into draft
resolutions had always been and would always be one
of her delegation’s main concerns. Her delegation
failed to understand why some had objected to the
agreed language in the draft resolution, especially as
youth under foreign occupation suffered doubly, due to
occupation and the economic and social crises. The
countries that had objected to the agreed language
wanted to eliminate all references in the draft
resolution to the economic and financial crises.A/C.3/66/SR.42
11-58360 8
Agenda item 28: Advancement of women (continued)
(b) Implementation of the outcome of the
Fourth World Conference on Women and
of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/ L.59: Follow-up to the
Fourth World Conference on Women and full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly
65. Ms. Critchlow (Guyana), introducing the draft
resolution, said that it built on the strong momentum
generated in 2010 and focused on strengthening
institutional arrangements in light of the establishment
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women).
66. The Chair said that the draft resolution had no
programme budget implications.
67. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.59 was adopted
without a vote.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.