United Nations A/C.3/63/SR.48
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-third session
Official Records
Distr.: General
19 January 2009
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
08-61692 (E)
*0861692*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 48th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 25 November 2008, at 3 p.m.
Chairman: Mr. Majoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)
Contents
Agenda item 55: Social development (continued)
(e) Review and appraisal of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons (continued)
Agenda item 58: Report of the Human Rights Council (continued)
Agenda item 62: Elimination of racism and racial discrimination (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
Agenda item 61: Indigenous issues (continued)
(a) Indigenous issues (continued)A/C.3/63/SR.48
08-61692 2
The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
Agenda item 55: Social development (continued)
(e) Review and appraisal of the World Programme
of Action concerning Disabled Persons
(A/63/172 and 183; A/C.3/63/L.3/Rev.1)
(continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.3/Rev.1: Realizing the
Millennium Development Goals for persons with
disabilities through the implementation of the World
Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons
and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities
1. The Chairman said that the draft resolution
contained no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Hermoso (Philippines), submitting the
revised version of the draft resolution, said that the
World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons, which analysed disability issues from a
development perspective, continued to be a useful
guide to ensure that persons with disabilities were
included in the efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. The draft resolution combined the
thrust of the World Programme of Action with the
perspectives of the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities to address disability issues.
3. The resolution would help to achieve the goal of
full participation and equalization of opportunities for
persons with disabilities, and he hoped that the
resolution would be adopted by consensus, as had
similar resolutions since 1982.
4. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia, the
Congo, El Salvador, Ghana, Honduras, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liberia, Peru,
Uganda, Ukraine, Mali, Mauritius, Montenegro,
Nigeria, Republic of Korea, Swaziland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkmenistan
had joined the sponsors.
5. Ms. Awino-Kafeero (Uganda), speaking on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Conference
(OIC), introduced a proposed oral amendment to the
draft resolution which would insert the following
additional preambular paragraph, four bis: “Bearing in
mind that conditions of peace and security based on
full respect for the purposes and principles contained in
the Charter of the United Nations and observance of
applicable human rights instruments are indispensable
for the full protection of persons with disabilities, in
particular during armed conflicts and foreign
occupation” which reproduced the text of paragraph u.
of the Convention. Adoption of the proposed
amendment would be a further reaffirmation of the
international community’s respect for the Convention.
6. Mr. Hermoso (Philippines) requested a recorded
vote on the amendment. His country, as a State party to
the Convention, was committed to its provisions.
However, in order to remain impartial as the facilitator,
the Philippines would abstain from voting on the
proposed amendment.
7. Mr. González (Costa Rica) regretted that a vote
was needed. His delegation would vote in favour of the
proposed amendment, which reflected provisions of the
Convention. As the only legally binding instrument on
disability, the Convention set the main standard for
promoting and protecting the rights of persons with
disabilities and was a powerful instrument for
promoting their development. The World Programme
of Action, which had been created two decades
previously, did not reflect the new paradigm of
disability and should therefore be updated on the basis
of the Convention so that it could continue to serve as
a social policy instrument.
8. His delegation disagreed with some of the
contents of the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document A/63/183 on the World
Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons. He
regretted that the report referred to the prevention of
disability, thereby promoting a model that was no
longer in use. Prevention was important and obligatory,
but the Department of Economic and Social Affairs had
a clear mandate to help promote and protect the rights
of those who already had disabilities.
9. Mr. Fieschi (France), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, regretted that a vote was needed on a
resolution that had traditionally been adopted by
consensus. The European Union supported the
compromise text that had resulted from the
negotiations, as submitted by the Philippines. The
European Union would vote against the amendment,
not on account of its substance, but because it did not
agree with the last-minute amendment, which was in
any case already covered by other paragraphs of the
draft resolution. The European Union had supportedA/C.3/63/SR.48
3 08-61692
the negotiation and adoption of the Convention and
considered all of its paragraphs to be important.
10. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico) said that his delegation
would abstain from voting on the amendment as an
expression of support for the work of the Philippine
delegation. It might seem strange that Mexico, as the
country that had initiated work on the Convention, did
not support the amendment, but his delegation believed
that the selection of just one paragraph removed it from
its context. It would go against the integrity of the
Convention to give some elements priority over others.
11. Ms. Janson (Canada) said that her delegation
could not accept the amendment referring to the issue
of foreign occupation. Such an amendment distracted
from the purpose of the draft resolution, which was
concerned with the rights of persons with disabilities
throughout the world, and needlessly politicized the
text. Canada would therefore vote against the
amendment.
12. Mr. McMahan (United States) said that his
delegation supported the resolution but would vote
against the amendment. He regretted that the
amendment had been tabled at the last minute. Its
highly politicized language and its legal imprecision
detracted from efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals for persons with disabilities.
13. Ms. Hill (New Zealand) said that her delegation
appreciated the efforts made by the Philippines to bring
delegations together on the important issue of persons
with disabilities, an area where Member States could
and should always find common ground. Her
delegation had no difficulty with the substance of the
amendment, but would abstain from the vote,
preferring to support the integrity of the text submitted
by the Philippines.
14. At the request of the Philippines, a recorded vote
was taken on the oral amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.3/Rev.1 proposed by Uganda.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Chad, China,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt,
Eritrea, Gambia, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Monaco, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Angola, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Cape Verde,
Chile, Colombia, Congo, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Japan, Kenya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Trinidad and
Tobago, Vanuatu.
15. The proposed oral amendment to draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.3//Rev.1 was adopted by 67 votes to 41,
with 52 abstentions.*
16. The Chairman invited the Committee to take
action on draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.3/Rev.1, as orally
amended, as a whole.
17. Mr. Jordi-Tomás (Andorra), Mr. Suárez
(Colombia), Mr. Nikuljski (the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia) and Ms. Park Enna (Republic
* The delegation of Tanzania subsequently informed the
Committee that it had intended to abstain from the vote
on the proposed amendment.A/C.3/63/SR.48
08-61692 4
of Korea) withdrew their delegations’ sponsorship of
the resolution.
18. Mr. Hermoso (Philippines) regretted that a vote
had been requested as previous resolutions on the
subject had been adopted by consensus since 1982. He
hoped that delegations would continue to seek a
consensus at future sessions. The resolution had been
inspired by the World Programme of Action and would
help to include persons with disabilities in the efforts
to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. He
urged delegations to look at the resolution as a whole
and not to withdraw their sponsorship.
19. The Chairman said that, in accordance with
rule 130 of the rules of procedure, the Committee
would vote on the resolution as a whole, as orally
amended.
20. Mr. Fieschi (France), speaking on behalf of the
European Union, said that the European Union would
vote in favour of the resolution as a whole.
21. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.3/Rev.1, as orally amended.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
None.
22. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.3/Rev.1, as orally
amended, was adopted by 176 votes to 0, with
0 abstentions.
23. Ms. Eilon Shahar (Israel) regretted the inclusion
of political elements in the text in an attempt to draw
artificial parallels between two different legal regimes
under international law — human rights law and the
law of armed conflict — which only undermined the
effectiveness of each regime.
24. Ms. Sapag (Chile) regretted that the resolution
had not received as broad a level of sponsorship as in
the previous year. Her delegation reiterated its
commitment to the World Programme of Action and
urged delegations to reach agreement on such
important matters in future.
25. The Chairman proposed that the Committee
should take note, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 55/488, of the note by the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the International Plan of
Action for the United Nations Literacy Decade
(A/63/172).
26. It was so decided.A/C.3/63/SR.48
5 08-61692
Agenda item 58: Report of the Human Rights
Council (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.57*,
A/C.3/63/L.57/Rev.1 and A/C.3/63/L.77)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.57*: “Report of the Human
Rights Council”
27. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that
the draft resolution was very important as it expressed
the Committee’s support for the mandate entrusted to
the Human Rights Council and served to validate its
work. While giving blanket support to the Council’s
recommendations contained in its report, the
Non-Aligned Movement reserved the right in future to
examine the Council’s recommendations individually.
He proposed that, in the second paragraph of the
proposed text, the word “endorses” should be replaced
by “acknowledges”, so as to enable it to be given broad
support.
28. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that if the new wording proposed by one of the two
original sponsors was adopted, it would be the
Secretariat’s understanding that the Third Committee
had decided to recommend that the General Assembly
should not support the recommendations contained in
the report of the Human Rights Council. As a result,
the draft resolution would have no programme budget
implications and document A/C.3/63/L.77 would
accordingly be withdrawn.
29. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) said that he in turn
wished to express his understanding that the draft
resolution proposed by the African Group alone
(A/C.3/63/L.57/Rev.1) had been withdrawn. He confirmed
the amendment to draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.57*, whose
purpose was to acknowledge the recommendations
contained in the Council’s report, leaving it to the General
Assembly to express its views thereon.
30. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) said that
his delegation wished to join the sponsors.
31. Ms. Eilon Shahar (Israel) requested a recorded
vote on the draft resolution.
32. Mr. Dhalladoo (Mauritius), speaking on behalf
of the Group of African States, stressed the importance
of the Human Rights Council, especially its universal
periodic review mechanism, as a means of promoting
the full realization of human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, which was the collective
responsibility of all Member States. The Committee
had a vital role to play in considering the Council’s
report and its recommendations. He welcomed the
Committee’s adoption by consensus of draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.47 on the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, which was reinforced but not
duplicated by the draft resolution under consideration.
He called on all delegations to vote in favour of it and
thus send a clear message of support for the work of
the Council.
33. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) asked
the representative of Mauritius to confirm the
withdrawal of A/C.3/63/L.57/Rev.1.
34. Mr. Dhalladoo (Mauritius), speaking on behalf of
the Group of African States, confirmed that he wished to
withdraw draft resolutionA/C.3/63/L.57/Rev.1.
35. Ms. Eilon Shahar (Israel), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that the
Council’s report once again revealed its obsession with
Israel, denounced by the Secretary-General. Since its
last report, it had adopted seven resolutions
condemning her country, all of which were lacking in
the objectivity that was supposed to be among its basic
attributes. In the previous year, it had also held another
one-sided special session against Israel, bringing the
total number to four, which was more than the number
of all other special sessions combined. The Council’s
distorted attention to Israel was nowhere more obvious
than in the skewed report of its fact-finding mission to
Beit Hanoun, which was the subject of one of the
recommendations under consideration. His delegation
would therefore be voting against the draft resolution.
36. Mr. Fieschi (France), speaking on behalf of the
European Union in explanation of vote before the
voting, said that the draft resolution raised several
problems of method and principle. Because of its late
submission, it had not been duly discussed within the
Committee and had not been the subject of a
transparent process of negotiation. Moreover, the
General Committee of the General Assembly had
decided in October 2008 that the Council’s report
would be considered by the plenary and that the Third
Committee would only concern itself with the
Council’s recommendations, which in any case related
to too wide range of subjects to be covered by a single
resolution. By lumping all the recommendations
together, the draft text obliged States to adopt an
overall position on subjects that would each haveA/C.3/63/SR.48
08-61692 6
merited a separate examination, thus increasing the
risks of disagreement and jeopardizing the progress of
the Committee’s work. In addition, one of the
recommendations, concerning the Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights had already been adopted by the
General Assembly by consensus, and it was not
desirable for the Assembly to adopt the same text more
than once in different ways. Lastly, the European
Union was not convinced of the need to adopt a draft
resolution to permit the implementation of the
recommendations in question; the previous year, it had
been considered sufficient to take note of them orally.
The European Union would therefore abstain from
voting on the draft resolution, while continuing to give
its full support to the Human Rights Council and
without taking any substantive position on its report or
the recommendations contained therein.
37. Ms. Hill (New Zealand), speaking in explanation
of vote before the voting on behalf of Liechtenstein,
New Zealand, Norway and Switzerland, said that,
although supportive of the implementation of the
Human Rights Council’s recommendations, it would
abstain on the draft resolution because it was
inconsistent with the General Committee’s recent
decision, ambiguous in its scope and procedurally
incorrect with regard to the recommendation on the
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The Committee
should in future take action on any recommendation to
the General Assembly as indicated by the General
Committee and through a separate draft resolution for
each recommendation, as it had done previously. The
draft resolution under consideration could not be
accepted as a precedent for future treatment of the
Human Rights Council’s recommendations to the
General Assembly. She looked forward to a more
consensual approach in that regard at future sessions.
38. Mr. McMahan (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that as the Committee had already decided by draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.47 to take action on one of the
Council’s recommendations, concerning the Optional
Protocol, there should be nothing in the current draft
resolution pertaining to that recommendation of the
Council. Moreover, the Council’s report contained
resolutions and decisions contrary to its mandate to
promote and protect human rights worldwide. It had
repeatedly failed to respond appropriately to some of
the most pressing human rights situations, in particular
in Sudan, Zimbabwe and Cuba. It had adopted
measures that could actually restrict human rights and
had placed severe restrictions on the participation of
civil society in the universal periodic review
mechanism, thus jeopardizing its possible usefulness. It
continued to give excessive and unfair attention to
Israel which, despite the constant threats hanging over
it, was a diverse, open, free and democratic society. His
delegation hoped that the Council would correct its
trajectory, bearing in mind that its mandate was to protect
individuals and not Governments that injured or abused
them. In the absence of a necessary reform of the Council,
his delegation would vote against the draft resolution.
39. Mr. González (Costa Rica), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that his
delegation supported the work of the Human Rights
Council and rejected any attempt to diminish its role.
Since, however, in view of the General Committee’s
decision that the Council’s report should be considered
by the General Assembly in plenary, it was not
appropriate for the Third Committee to adopt a draft
resolution on the subject. His delegation would
therefore abstain from voting on it, so as not to
establish a precedent.
40. Ms. Hibell (United Kingdom), speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, said that her
delegation hoped, in view of the withdrawal of
A/C.3/63/L.77, that the costs of the Council’s
recommendations would, as far as possible, be met
from existing resources. As announced by the
representative of France, her delegation would abstain
from voting.
41. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, said that his delegation
regretted having to abstain from voting on a report by a
body to which it attached great importance, but it
considered the draft resolution to be inconsistent with
the decision of the General Committee. Moreover, the
wording of the draft resolution was ambiguous in
regard to the Council’s recommendations, which his
delegation supported.
42. At the request of Israel, a recorded vote was
taken on draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.57* as orally
amended.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,A/C.3/63/SR.48
7 08-61692
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Palau, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Belgium,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay.
43. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.57*, as orally
amended, was adopted by 117 votes to 5, with
55 abstentions.
44. Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea) said that, although his delegation had voted
in favour of the draft resolution, it continued to reject
the Council’s resolution No. 7/15 on the human rights
situation in his country, contained in its report. He
expressed concern about its adoption of country-
specific resolutions, reflecting double standards and a
politicization of the Council, which would only weaken
the function of the universal periodic review
mechanism.
45. Ms. Pi (Uruguay) said that, as a member of the
Human Rights Council, her country supported its
action and would continue to work for it. Her
delegation had sponsored the corresponding draft
resolution in 2007 but had abstained from voting on it
at the current session since the report should be
considered by the General Assembly in plenary. It was
not appropriate for the Committee to take a position on
its recommendations or indeed to consider them
together in one single draft resolution, particularly
when it had already taken action on one of the
recommendations through draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.47, which her delegation supported.
46. Mr. Saeed (Sudan) said that his delegation would
have liked the draft resolution to have been couched in
stronger terms. Human rights violations by the United
States of America, which was the only country that had
not voted for the establishment of the Human Rights
Council, should be the subject of a decision by the
Council. He hoped that the new administration in that
country would close the Guantánamo Bay detention
camp and change its policy in regard to migrants,
Muslims and Afro-Americans.
47. Mr. Onemola (Nigeria) said that his delegation
regretted the amendment to the draft resolution which,
it its former wording, would have ensured support for
the establishment of the office of President of the
Human Rights Council.
48. Ms. Bhoroma (Zimbabwe) said that the way
forward in dealing with human rights issues worldwide
lay through the Human Rights Council; her delegation
had therefore voted in favour of the draft resolution.
She denounced the obsession of the United States of
America with Zimbabwe, which had mechanisms in
place to meet the challenges currently facing it. SheA/C.3/63/SR.48
08-61692 8
hoped that the Human Rights Council would one day
count the United States among its members and would
thus be able to review that country’s human rights
situation.
49. Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba), speaking in exercise
of the right of reply, said that the Council’s report did
indeed fail to mention the most egregious human rights
abuses committed by the United States of America on
its own territory and throughout the world, including at
Guantánamo, which it was occupying illegally. The
disrepute in which the current administration had fallen
because of the killings, torture and other atrocities
perpetrated by the United States of America in centres
operated by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
around the world had been reflected in the recent
election; it criticized the Human Rights Council but
feared to allow it to examine its own human rights
record.
Agenda item 62: Elimination of racism and racial
discrimination (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.51/Rev.1 and
A/C.3/63/L.70)
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.51/Rev.1: Global efforts for
the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
50. The Chairman said that the statement of
programme budget implications for the draft resolution
were contained in document A/C.3/63/L.70.
51. Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda) read out oral
revisions to the text of the draft resolution. In the
second preambular paragraph, the words “Recalling
also” should be replaced with the word “Noting”. In
the fourth preambular paragraph, the word
“Welcoming” should be replaced with the words
“Noting also”. In the fifth preambular paragraph, the
word “Welcoming” should be replaced with the word
“Noting”. In the eleventh preambular paragraph, the
phrase “Acknowledging the support rendered by the
Office of the” should be replaced with the phrase
“Welcoming the continued determination of the
former”.
52. Paragraph 10 should be replaced with the
following text: “Calls upon all States, in accordance
with the commitments undertaken in paragraph 147 of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, to
take all necessary measures to combat the incitement to
violence motivated by racial hatred, including through
misuse of print, audiovisual and electronic media and
new communication technologies and in collaboration
with the service providers to promote the use of such
technologies, including the Internet, to contribute to
the fight against racism, in conformity with
international standards of freedom of expression and
taking all necessary measures to guarantee that right;”.
53. The phrase “as well as information on the follow-
up and implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action” should be inserted at the end of
paragraph 11. Paragraph 19 should be deleted. Old
paragraph 22, renumbered as paragraph 21, should be
replaced with the following text: “Expresses
appreciation for the High Commissioner’s commitment
to contribute to the successful outcome of the Durban
Review Conference including her appeal to all Member
States and other stakeholders to participate in the
Durban Review Conference”.
54. Old paragraph 34, renumbered as paragraph 33,
should be replaced with the following text: “Reaffirms
that the General Assembly is the highest
intergovernmental mechanism for the formulation and
appraisal of policy matters relating to the economic,
social and related fields, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 50/227 of 24 May 1996, and
along with the Human Rights Council, shall constitute
an intergovernmental process for the comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, and further
reaffirms that the Human Rights Council shall continue
to have a central role in the follow-up of the
implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action within the United Nations
system;”.
55. Old paragraphs 35 and 36 should be deleted. Old
paragraph 37, renumbered as paragraph 34, should be
replaced with the following text: “Expresses its
appreciation for the continuing work of the
mechanisms mandated to follow up the World
Conference, while keeping in mind the assessment of
the effectiveness of these mechanisms to be undertaken
by the Durban Review Conference”.A/C.3/63/SR.48
9 08-61692
56. In old paragraph 38, renumbered as paragraph 35,
the word “Endorses should be replaced with
“Acknowledges”. In old paragraph 39, renumbered as
paragraph 36, the word “Welcomes” should be replaced
with the words “Takes note of”, and the words “at the
second part of its first session” should be removed. In
old paragraph 43, renumbered as paragraph 40, the
word “requests” should be replaced with the word
“invites”.
57. Old paragraph 44, renumbered as paragraph 41,
should be replaced with the following text: “Calls upon
those States that have not yet done so to consider
signing and ratifying or acceding to the instruments
enumerated under paragraph 78 of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, including the
International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their
Families of 1990”.
58. In old paragraph 45, renumbered as paragraph 42,
the word “deep” should be removed. The phrase “the
work of the Special Rapporteur” should be replaced
with “the work done by the former Special
Rapporteur”. The word “endorses” should be replaced
with “welcomes”.
59. In old paragraph 54, renumbered paragraph 51, a
new footnote 9 should be inserted after the word
“decisions”. It should read as follows: “Decision
PC.1/12, PC.1/13, PC.2/8”, on the understanding that
the Secretariat would insert all other decisions from the
organizational first and second substantive sessions of
the Preparatory Committee. In old paragraph 56,
renumbered as paragraph 53, the word “Welcomes”
should be replaced with “expresses appreciation for”.
The phrase “Preparatory Meeting to the Durban
Review” should be inserted between the words
“Regional” and “Conference”. Old paragraph 58,
renumbered as paragraph 55, should be deleted.
60. A new paragraph 57 should be inserted as
follows: “Requests the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to undertake initiatives to encourage contributions to
the voluntary fund established pursuant to decision
PC.1/12 of the organizational Preparatory Committee,
including the decision to appeal for contributions from
extrabudgetary resources to cover the costs of
participation of representatives of Least Developed
Countries in the Durban Review Conference;”.
61. Old paragraphs 60-62 should be deleted. Old
paragraph 63, renumbered as paragraph 58, should be
replaced with the following text: “Recommends that the
meetings of the Human Rights Council focusing on the
follow-up to the World Conference and the
implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action are scheduled in a manner to
allow broad participation that avoids overlap with the
sessions during the consideration of this agenda item in
the General Assembly”.
62. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Russian Federation had joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution as orally revised.
63. Mr. Fieschi (France), speaking on behalf of the
European Union in explanation of vote before the
voting said that the European Union remained fully
committed to combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. An active
participant at the 2001 Durban Conference, the
European Union had agreed to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action, which it had subsequently
worked to implement fully. It had also worked to
prepare the Review Conference, and had sought to
ensure a consensus-based and inclusive approach. The
European Union reaffirmed its commitment to that
process and to the goals determined by the Preparatory
Committees and endorsed by the General Assembly.
The existing standards on fundamental freedoms and
human rights, and in particular the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, should be promoted and implemented.
64. The European Union was grateful for the open
and constructive approach of the Group of 77 and
China during informal consultations. However, there
remained some issues on which an agreement had not
been possible. One example was the reference to the
mandate of the Ad-Hoc Committee on the Elaboration
of Complementary Standards in old paragraph 39,
renumbered as paragraph 36. While respecting the
decision of the Human Rights Council, the European
Union had opposed the establishment of that mandate.
65. Ms. Eilon Shahar (Israel) said that the Israeli
people, and all Jews, were keenly aware of the
consequences of racism and of the need to confront it.
Israel had approached the Durban Conference with
high expectations, but had quickly been disappointed
by the unabashed hatred both at the Conference and in
the streets. The Conference had deviated from itsA/C.3/63/SR.48
08-61692 10
original purpose and had become a platform for the
demonization of Israel. The current United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights had described
some of those events as virulent anti-Semitic behaviour
and a betrayal of the core principles of the Conference.
66. The preparatory process for the Review
Conference was headed in the same disappointing
direction as its predecessor: further expressions of
anti-Israeli and anti-Semitic sentiments were to be
expected. Israel remained hopeful that a genuine, frank
debate on the topic would one day be possible.
However, it would not participate in the Conference,
and urged the international community not to
legitimize such a carnival of hatred.
67. At the request of Israel, a recorded vote was
taken on draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.51/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Israel, Monaco, Netherlands, Poland, Romania,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine.
68. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.51/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted by 130 votes to 11 with
35 abstentions.
69. Mr. McMahan (United States of America) said
that his country was strongly opposed to racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as
its track record showed. His delegation agreed with
much of the content of the resolution but found the
drafting unsatisfactory. The resolution praised the 2001
Durban Conference and requested resources to
implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action. His country’s position on that Conference was
well known: racism could not be combated by using
hateful language, by arguing that the importance of the
Holocaust had been overstated, or by singling out
Israel for censure and abuse. The Durban Review
Conference seemed set to take a similar approach. The
draft paragraphs for use in the outcome document
contained dozens of unfair, unbalanced and often
untrue allegations about Israel, while failing to address
more serious problems elsewhere.
70. Furthermore, some of the proposed activities
duplicated the work of other bodies such as the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, the Human Rights Committee
established by the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, and conventions of the International
Labour Organization on workers’ rights.
71. His delegation therefore did not believe that the
Human Rights Council should act as a preparatoryA/C.3/63/SR.48
11 08-61692
committee for the Durban Review Conference, or that
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council should engage with the follow-up process.
Given the lack of resources, it was not appropriate to
provide allocations for the Review Conference.
72. Ms. Kurosaki (Japan) said that her delegation
had abstained from voting, and was concerned that the
programme budget implications of the resolution
would impair the normal functioning of the United
Nations financial system. She appreciated the efforts of
the Secretariat to minimize and absorb the costs, and
hoped it would continue to seek to use resources
effectively.
73. Ms. Hill (New Zealand), speaking also on behalf
of Norway, said that her delegation had voted in favour
of the resolution in a spirit of compromise, in the hope
of returning to a consensus text. Some of the concerns
had been accommodated, but others had not. In
particular, it did not believe that such resolutions
should be used to direct subsidiary mechanisms of the
Human Rights Council as envisaged in paragraph 36.
Nor did her delegation’s support for the resolution
prejudice its position on the outcomes of the Ad-Hoc
Committee on Complementary Standards.
74. The Chairman proposed that the Committee, in
accordance with General Assembly decision 55/488,
should take note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its seventy-
second and seventy-third sessions (A/63/18), and the
report of the Human Rights Council on the
preparations for the review conference on the
implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action (A/63/112 and Add.1).
75. It was so decided.
Agenda item 64: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/63/L.34/Rev.1,
A/C.3/63/L.39/Rev.1, A/C.3/63/L.78,
A/C.3/63/L.46/Rev.1
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.34/Rev.1: Elimination of all
forms of intolerance and discrimination based on
religion or belief
76. Ms. Gasri (France) read out oral revisions to the
text of the draft resolution. In the tenth preambular
paragraph, the phrase “freedom to change one’s
religion or belief” should be replaced with the phrase
“freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of
one’s choice”. In the eleventh preambular paragraph,
the phrase “Concerned at attacks” should be replaced
with the phrase “Seriously concerned at all attacks”.
The phrase “in violation of international law, in
particular human rights and humanitarian law,” should
be inserted after the word “shrines,”. In the twelfth
preambular paragraph, the phrase “concerned at
misuse” should be replaced with “concerned also at
any misuse”.
77. A new fourteenth preambular paragraph should
be inserted: “Expressing deep concern at all forms of
discrimination and intolerance, including prejudices
against persons and derogatory stereotyping of persons,
based on religion or belief,”.
78. In the new fifteenth preambular paragraph, the
word “enhanced” should be inserted after the words
“the importance of”. In the new sixteenth preambular
paragraph, the phrase “respect and freedom” should be
replaced with the phrase “respect for religious and
cultural diversity and in the universal promotion and
protection of human rights, including freedom”. In the
new seventeenth preambular paragraph, the phrase “the
rise in all parts” should be replaced with “the rise in
various parts”. The phrase “situations where violence”
should be replaced with “situations of violence”. The
phrase “individuals from other vulnerable groups are
carried out” should be replaced with “other individuals
on the grounds or”.
79. A new nineteenth preambular paragraph should
be inserted: “Reaffirming, in this regard, that education
shall be directed to the full development of the human
personality and to the strengthening of respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms and shall
promote understanding, tolerance and friendship
among all nations, racial or religious groups and
further the activities of the United Nations for the
maintenance of peace”.
80. In paragraph 3, the phrase “are
non-discriminatory” should be inserted between the
word “others,” and the phrase “and are applied”. The
final part of the paragraph, after the words “conscience
and religion”, should be deleted. In paragraph 7, after
the words “Emphasizes that”, the words “the conductA/C.3/63/SR.48
08-61692 12
of” should be deleted. The words “paragraph 5” should
be replaced with “paragraph 6”. Between the words
“local level” and “as and when legally”, the word
“and” should be deleted.
81. In paragraph 9, the phrase “to eliminate
intolerance and discrimination based on religion or
belief” should be replaced with “to protect and
promote the freedom of thought, conscience, religion
or belief”. In paragraph 9 (b), between the words “to
torture” and “other cruel”, the word “and” should be
replaced with “or”. In paragraph 9 (d), the word “any”
should be replaced with “all”, and the words “his or
her” with “their”. In paragraph 9 (e), the phrase “for
reasons grounded in” should be replaced with “from
the individual on the grounds of”. The final part of that
paragraph, after the words “religion or belief and that”,
should be replaced with the following text: “everyone
has the right to refrain from disclosing information
concerning one’s religious affiliation on such
documents against one’s will”. Paragraph 9 (f) should
be replaced with the following text: “to ensure that
everyone has the right and opportunity to have access,
on general terms of equality, to public service in one’s
country, without any discrimination on the basis of
religion or belief;”. Paragraph 9 (g) should be deleted.
In old paragraph 9 (h), renumbered as paragraph 9 (g),
the words “in particular,” should be introduced after
the words “To ensure”.
82. In paragraph 12 (a), the word “intolerance”
should be added after the word “discrimination”. A
new paragraph 13 should be added, to read as follows:
“Also emphasizes that no religion should be equated
with terrorism, as this may have adverse consequences
on the enjoyment of the right to freedom of religion or
belief of all members of the religious communities
concerned”.
83. In old paragraph 13, renumbered as paragraph 14,
the words between “Alliance of Civilizations” and “by
the General Assembly” should be replaced with the
following text: “and its High Representative and the
focal point designated within the Secretariat”. In old
paragraph 15 (b), renumbered as paragraph 16 (b), the
word “where” should be replaced with “of”. The word
“other” should be inserted between the phrase “as well
as” and the word “individuals”. The words “from other
vulnerable groups are carried out” should be replaced
with the words “on the grounds or”. In the following
subparagraph, a comma should be added after the word
“Nations”.
84. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following countries had joined the sponsors:
Australia, Brazil, Dominican Republic, Guinea,
Mauritius, Thailand, Turkey, United Republic of
Tanzania and Uruguay.
85. Ms. Awino-Kafeero (Uganda), speaking on
behalf of the Organisation of The Islamic Conference
(OIC) in explanation of position, said that OIC wished
to underline that it opposed all forms of intolerance
and discrimination based on religious belief and
condemned in the strongest possible terms all acts of
violence falsely claimed by their perpetrators to be
carried out in the name of religions. Terrorism,
therefore, should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group. OIC had
consistently supported the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief and had no
objections to the general thrust of the draft resolution.
86. Despite intense negotiations, OIC had been
unable to resolve its difficulties regarding a clear
pronouncement on recent instances of deliberate
stereotyping of religions in the media; respect for and
protection of all religions and beliefs; and respect for
national laws and religious norms regarding the right to
change one’s religion. Further, OIC understood that
welcoming the work of the Special Rapporteur in the
draft resolution did not preclude the possibility of
disagreeing with her conclusions and
recommendations.
87. OIC also understood that the freedom to adopt a
religion or belief of one’s choice and the freedom to
manifest religion were applicable to both the individual
and the religious community to which the individual
belonged. Therefore, the defamation of religions was a
serious threat to that freedom, as it could lead to the
illicit restriction of the freedom of religion and
incitement to religious hatred and violence, as well as
social disharmony and violations of human rights. OIC
noted with deep concern the serious instances of
intolerance, discrimination and violence based on
religion or belief occurring in many parts of the world.
Nonetheless, OIC believed that it was important to
adopt the draft resolution by consensus. It was hoped
that in future sessions, it would be possible to address
concerns such as the negative portrayals of certain
religions in the media and the introduction of
Government measures which specifically discriminated
against persons of particular ethnic and religious
backgrounds, in particular, Muslim minorities.A/C.3/63/SR.48
13 08-61692
88. Mr. Mamadouba (Guinea) said that his
delegation was withdrawing its sponsorship of the draft
resolution.
89. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.34/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.39/Rev.1: Protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism (and the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/63/L.78)
90. The Chairman said that the draft resolution had
no programme budget implications.
91. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico) said that the following
countries had joined the sponsors: Belarus, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Japan and the Russian Federation. Last-
minute negotiations had resulted in some changes to
the draft resolution. Paragraph 18 would read:
“Recognizes the need to continue ensuring that fair and
clear procedures under the United Nations terrorism-
related sanctions regime are strengthened in order to
enhance their efficiency and transparency, and
welcomes and encourages the Security Council’s
continued enhancement of efforts in support of these
objectives, while emphasizing the importance of these
sanctions in countering terrorism.” Paragraph
26 should be divided into two parts. The first part
should be inserted directly after paragraph 2 and would
read as follows: “Expresses serious concern at the
occurrence of violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the context of countering
terrorism.” The second part would be maintained as
paragraph 27 and should read as follows: “Request the
Special Rapporteur, within the context of his mandate,
to continue to make recommendations, with regard to
preventing, combating and redressing violations of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in the context
of countering terrorism.”
92. Ms. Hoosen (South Africa) said that in light of
the amendments just introduced by the delegation of
Mexico, her delegation had decided to withdraw its
amendment (A/C.3/63/L.78).
93. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) noted
that the following countries had joined the sponsors:
Australia, Egypt, the Gambia, the Republic of
Moldova, Suriname and Ukraine.
94. Ms. Hoosen (South Africa), speaking in
explanation of position, said that all decisions and draft
resolutions of the Committee should strive to prevent
human rights violations, provide adequate protection to
victims where prevention failed and provide remedies
to victims of human rights violations. The human
rights aspect of counter-terrorism measures must be
reflected clearly.
95. It was difficult to comprehend the broad
reference to Security Council targeted sanctions in the
text without placing it specifically in a context of
international human rights standards. Without a
specific human rights context, the issue belonged
elsewhere in the system, so as not to introduce the war
on terror and the fight against terrorism into the work
of the Third Committee, which considered issues
related to human rights. Moreover, “victim” should be
more broadly defined in the draft resolution. Despite
those and other differences, South Africa would join
the consensus on the draft resolution.
96. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.39/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
97. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that her
delegation interpreted paragraph 19 in connection with
former paragraph 18, which referred to Member States’
obligations with regard to Security Council measures
in the fight against terrorism.
98. Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
delegation had joined the consensus; however it had
reservations regarding paragraph 11, which referred to
the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and its 1967 Protocol. Her country was not party to the
Convention or its Protocol, but it would continue to
cooperate in that area under its national laws and
international commitments.
Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.46/Rev.1: Committee on the
Rights of the Child
99. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that a document on the programme budget implications
of the draft resolution (A/C.3/63/L.61) had been issued
by the Secretariat. The estimates contained in that
document would be revised based on the revisions in
the draft resolution under discussion and the new
estimates submitted to the Fifth Committee, contingent
on the adoption of the draft resolution by the Third
Committee.
100. Ms. Hill (New Zealand) introducing the draft
resolution, said that it authorized the Committee on theA/C.3/63/SR.48
08-61692 14
Rights of the Child to meet in parallel chambers on a
temporary basis in order to reduce the Committee’s
backlog of reports and requested an evaluation by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to
assist States’ consideration of a longer term solution to
the backlog. The following amendments had been
made to the draft resolution: in paragraph 2, the word
“four” should be replaced with “three,”; “January
2011” should be replaced by “October 2010,” bringing
the temporary measure into line with the General
Assembly reporting cycle. If a backlog remained,
further solutions could be examined.
101. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) noted
that the following countries had joined the sponsors:
Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea-
Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malta, Republic of
Moldova, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Paraguay, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Thailand and Turkey.
102. Ms. Sapag (Chile) said that paragraph 4 was
fundamental to dealing with delays in the adoption of
reports.
103. Mr. Ochoa (Mexico) said that authorizing the
Committee to meet in parallel chambers limited the
discussion of national reports and minimized the value
added by the geographic diversity of members. It
should be viewed as an exceptional, temporary
measure, and long-term measures should be examined.
104. Draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.46/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
105. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) said that working in
two chambers was an exceptional and temporary
approach to handle delays in consideration of reports.
In principle, it was not appropriate to work in parallel
chambers because the overall analysis of the States
parties’ reports by experts should respect the principle
of fair geographic distribution.
106. Further, the omnibus draft resolution on the rights
of the child had enabled the Committee to deal with the
issue of the promotion and protection of the rights of
the child for over a decade. The presentation and
adoption of the draft resolution currently under
discussion was an exception. Member States should
continue to support the omnibus draft resolution on the
rights of the child.
107. Mr. McMahan (United States) said that his
delegation would disassociate itself from the
consensus. It did not support draft resolutions calling
for additional meetings, due to the cost implications.
Extra meetings to reduce the backlog would cost some
$4 to 5 million over the next several years. Moreover,
the costs associated with treaty bodies should not be
part of the regular United Nations budget. It was hoped
that an additional funding source would be found by
the time the backlog was eliminated.
108. Ms. Giménez-Jiménez (Venezuela, Bolivarian
Republic of) said that meetings in parallel chambers
were a temporary, exceptional measure which should
not prejudice the recommendations made by the
experts. The delays should be dealt with and other
solutions found.
109. Ms. Kurosaki (Japan) said that the Committee’s
backlog should be discussed in the general context of
the reform of the human rights treaty bodies. The draft
resolution had programme budget implications which
would be covered through the United Nations budget,
and it was cause for concern that they might impair the
normal functioning of the United Nations financial
system.
110. The Chairman proposed that the Committee, in
accordance with General Assembly decision 55/488,
should take note of the following reports of the
Secretary-General or of Committees: under agenda
item 64 (a), A/63/48, A/63/137 and A/63/280; under
agenda item 64 (b), A/63/259, A/63/287, A/63/223,
A/63/263, A/63/270, A/63/271, A/63/274, A/63/275,
A/63/286, A/63/288, A/63/289, A/63/290*, A/63/292,
A/63/313 and A/63/318; and under agenda item 64 (c),
A/63/326.
111. It was so decided.
Agenda item 61: Indigenous issues (continued)
(a) Indigenous issues (continued)
112. The Chairman proposed that the Committee, in
accordance with General Assembly decision 55/488,
should take note of the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the Status of
the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous
Populations (A/63/166).A/C.3/63/SR.48
15 08-61692
113. It was so decided.
Statements in exercise of the right of reply
114. Ms. Cross (United Kingdom), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, said that her country had
no doubt about its sovereignty over the Falkland
Islands. The principle of self-determination enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations underlay that
position. There could be no negotiation over the issue
unless the people of the Falkland Islands so wished.
The islanders themselves regularly made it clear that
they had no desire to lose British sovereignty or to
become independent.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.