United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.35
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
7 February 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-56636 (E)
*1156636*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 35th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 27 October 2011, at 10 a.m.
Chair: Mr. Zelioli (Vice-Chair) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Italy)
Contents
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives
(continued)A/C.3/66/SR.35
11-56636 2
In the absence of Mr. Haniff (Malaysia),
Mr. Zelioli (Italy), Vice-Chair, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued) (A/66/87)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/66/156, 161, 203, 204,
216, 225, 253, 254, 262, 264, 265, 268-272, 274,
283-285, 289, 290, 293, 310, 314, 325, 330, 342
and Add.1, and 372)
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (continued)
(A/66/267, 322, 343, 358, 361, 365, 374 and 518;
A/C.3/66/2)
1. Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that respect for national sovereignty was
essential in dealing with human-rights issues, as the
relevant laws and policies of the sovereign countries
concerned guaranteed the human rights of people under
their jurisdictions. The massive killings of innocent
civilians in Afghanistan, Iraq and occupied Palestine
were proof of the human-rights violations that resulted
from infringements upon national sovereignty.
Moreover, politicization, selectivity and double
standards must be avoided in addressing human rights
situations.
2. Politically motivated country-specific resolutions
continued to be adopted, only aggravating
confrontation and distrust. Western values could not be
the only criterion for human rights in a diverse world,
and using human-rights issues to topple the political
systems chosen by the people of the targeted countries
was itself a violation of human rights. Past human-
rights violations must also be addressed. During its
military occupation of Korea in the previous century,
Japan had committed genocide and the unprecedented
human-rights violation of forcing thousands of women
from Korea and other Asian countries into sexual
slavery as “comfort women”. Japan should follow the
precedent set by other nations with colonial histories
and express sincere apologies and compensate its
victims.
3. The people-centred concept of Juche, under
which human rights were inviolable and sacrosanct,
was the guiding principle of all State activities. His
Government therefore spared no effort to ensure its
people’s exercise of their human rights, as
demonstrated by its recent adoption of laws on the
promotion of women’s and children’s rights the
previous year and would continue to improve the
human-rights situation, in fulfilment of its international
obligations.
4. Mr. Al-Obaidi (Iraq) said that the Government of
the new, post-Saddam Iraq attached the utmost
importance to promoting human rights. Its actions to
that end included adopting a national plan on human
rights, taking into account all the recommendations
made by countries in its universal periodic review the
previous year, and implementing policies that fostered
tolerance, multiculturalism and freedom of religion and
belief. His Government also investigated and worked
to rectify human-rights violations committed against
minorities by terrorist groups, reporting them to
specialized agencies. Areas that had been rendered
unstable in previous years by terrorist activity from
within and outside Iraq had recently been secured by
the Government.
5. Iraqi legislation guaranteed freedom of thought,
conscience, religion and belief and provided means of
recourse in the event that those freedoms were
infringed upon. No person under the jurisdiction of the
Iraqi Government could lose their right to life, freedom
or personal security or be tortured, arrested, arbitrarily
detained or lose his job or housing because of his
religion or belief. Any violations of those legal
guarantees were prosecuted. Moreover, the Iraqi
Government prohibited laws that encouraged religious
hatred, discrimination or violence, and had established
an endowment for Christianity and other religions to
protect non-Muslims.
6. The new Iraq was working to fulfil its obligations
under international human-rights covenants and treaties
and bring national legislation into line with those
instruments. Sectarian violence and terrorist attacks
carried out by Al-Qaeda and other groups had
undermined his Government’s human-rights policy,
hence its redoubled efforts to stem the tide of violence
and the displacement of Iraqis of all walks of life. Iraq
had tackled the ensuing displacement crisis by
providing financial and food aid to the displaced,
including Iraqis who had fled the country, in order to
facilitate their return.A/C.3/66/SR.35
3 11-56636
7. Measures adopted by Iraq to create a culture of
human rights included the establishment of a national
monitoring system to detect human-rights violations. A
national policy of accountability and justice aimed to
counter Saddamism, a vestige of the former, dictatorial
regime that glorified the use of violence to solve
problems and that, like Nazism, could not be extirpated
overnight. His Government fully appreciated the
support of the international community in rebuilding
Iraq and establishing democratic institutions and would
continue to strive to meet all its human rights
obligations.
8. Ms. Poussi (Burkina Faso) said that human
development required the State to take a proactive
approach to promoting human rights. To that end, her
Government had put in place several legislative and
regulatory measures, policies and programmes in order
to reinforce civil and political rights and to improve the
exercise of economic, social and cultural rights.
Significant gains had been made since the 2001
adoption of a national policy on human rights, though
more remained to be done. That framework document
would be revised and put into practice by an initial
action plan for the years 2013 to 2015.
9. A number of measures had been taken to
guarantee the right to non-discrimination and to
equality before the law, particularly in the areas of the
administration of justice, employment, health,
education and civic participation in managing public
affairs. Judicial reform was under way in the form of
increases in the number of national areas of jurisdiction
and legal officials, and review of texts on legal aid.
Open houses on justice-related matters were held
regularly to educate the public on legal institutions.
10. The rights to life and physical and moral integrity
were also protected by a series of laws and regulations.
Her country had signed the moratorium on the death
penalty in 2007 and was working to abolish it
altogether. A party to the Convention against Torture
since 1999, Burkina Faso had ratified its Optional
Protocol in 2010 and was in the process of establishing
a national preventive mechanism. A national human-
rights commission was authorized to visit detention
centres and other locations to prevent torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Despite her Government’s attempts to raise awareness
of and combat the incidence of torture, prison
overpopulation gave cause for major concern.
11. The plurality of the media in her country attested
to Government efforts to create an environment
conducive to exercise of the rights to information and
freedom of expression. The State also funded the
activities of political parties in order to facilitate their
participation in public affairs and set quotas for female
participation in elections and political life in general.
12. Despite its limited resources, her Government
was working to ensure the enjoyment of economic,
social and cultural rights by guaranteeing the regular
payment of salaries and the right to work; providing
national health coverage and enhanced medical care;
allocating a fifth of the national budget to education
and expanding academic offerings, including literacy
education for non-traditional students. Poverty-
reduction efforts had also been undertaken, under a
national strategy on accelerated growth and sustainable
development.
13. With regard to women’s rights, Burkina Faso was
working with civil society to promote income-
generating activities involving women. The Government
had also provided over 1 million children with birth
certificates, with a view to ensuring their legal
protection. Awareness-raising campaigns were under
way to dispel negative perceptions of persons with
disabilities, against whom discrimination persisted
despite her country’s accession to the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional
Protocol and the passage of related national legislation.
In closing, reiterating her delegation’s commitment to
the exercise of all human rights, she pointed out that
Burkina Faso would welcome visits from the Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention and the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism.
14. Mr. Ferami (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that
the international community must consider religious
and national specificities and cultural diversity in its
efforts to counter the rapidly growing trends of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance threatening some societies. It was
regrettable that those phenomena were increasingly
targeting Islam and Muslims in particular. Cultural
rights should not provide the right to exacerbate
differences, which could lead to violence; instead, they
should serve to promote and celebrate cultural
diversity, which was a condition for peace.A/C.3/66/SR.35
11-56636 4
15. Despite repeated affirmations of the universality,
indivisibility, interdependence and equality of all
human rights, the existing international order was
characterized by selectivity and economic and political
exploitation. Political considerations should not affect
the promotion and protection of human rights,
especially as urgent situations in the Middle East and
elsewhere called for action. The unilateral sanctions
imposed by certain countries on developing countries,
in contravention of international law, violated the
latter’s inalienable right to development and to choose
their political, economic and social systems.
16. Such measures must cease immediately if the
right to development was to be fully realized. With
one-third of the world’s population living in abject
poverty and thus unable to exercise their basic human
rights, the human-rights machinery must take up
poverty alleviation as a central aim, and the brunt of
that task should be borne by States that used the labour
force and human resources of others. Unless the
majority of the world’s population was able to reap the
benefits of globalization — as only a privileged few
were currently doing — the freedom to live in dignity
would remain a dream.
17. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights should work in a wholly unbiased and
independent manner, within the human-rights
framework established by the Human Rights Council,
the main United Nations human-rights body, avoiding
insistence on human-rights standards that were not yet
internationally recognized. The Islamic Republic of
Iran had enjoyed a good working relationship with the
Office and had initiated a number of human-rights
dialogues with some countries, including States
members of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
18. No improvement in human-rights situations
would be brought about by naming and shaming
specific countries or by adopting resolutions targeting
them. However, as it had become an established
practice to pin-point certain situations, he wished to
draw attention to human-rights violations in some of
the self-proclaimed “clean” countries of the world.
Racism and racial discrimination continued to plague
European and other Western countries, and
Islamophobia was one of its manifestations, as evinced
by the outrageous Qur’an-burning incident.
Regrettably, some European Governments had not only
failed to address Islamophobia, but had also imposed
restrictions on Islamic cultural expression and spoken
out against multiculturalism, thereby aggravating the
existing anti-Muslim sentiment and the situation of
their Muslim minorities.
19. The United States of America granted
unconditional support to the Zionist regime and its
crimes, and was responsible for various other crimes,
including the killing of civilians by unmanned drone
attacks, as noted by the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights while
countering terrorism, establishing secret detention
centres throughout the world and using inhumane
interrogation methods on detainees.
20. For its part, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland was responsible for human-rights
violations within its territory and abroad, where its
foreign policy had directly or indirectly flouted human-
rights norms. According to reports from United Nations
special procedures mandate-holders, Canada had
violated the human rights of its own indigenous and
other minorities, a fact all the more shocking given that
country’s endorsement of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. In the
final analysis, improvements in human-rights situations
would result not from words or resolutions, but instead
from cooperation and development.
21. Ms. Mballa Eyenga (Cameroon) said that her
Government would spare no effort in heeding the
aspirations of its people where human rights were
concerned, despite the difficulties besetting all States
as a result of the global economic and financial crises,
natural disasters and climate change. Effective
ownership of human rights depended on human-rights
education, which provided the best means of creating a
culture of peace and thereby fostering sustainable
development. In its ten years of existence, the
Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
in Central Africa had made a significant contribution to
human rights education through its outreach activities,
which had benefited Government officials and civil
actors alike.
22. The Centre had helped build the capacity of
national human-rights institutions in the subregion to
function in accordance with the Paris Principles, in
addition to increasing the engagement of several
Central African countries with human-rights
mechanisms and improving cooperation between
Governments, civil society and the population of theA/C.3/66/SR.35
5 11-56636
subregion. Cameroon’s collaboration with the Centre
had been particularly fruitful throughout the universal
periodic review (UPR) process, over the course of
which Cameroon had accepted 41 recommendations
and adopted a road map and timeline for their
implementation. The Centre had helped organize a
briefing for Cameroon’s technical and financial
partners on actions taken by the country to implement
the UPR.
23. The Centre must continue to receive the
necessary financial and human resources to carry out
its work and meet the needs of the region. Her country
welcomed the appointment of Ms. Maarit Kohonen-
Sheriff as head of the Centre in 2009 and hoped that
additional high-level posts would be created. Lastly,
she hailed the Centre’s partnerships with United
Nations agencies and subregional organizations, and
expressed special thanks to Cameroon’s development
partners for their financial contributions to the Centre.
24. Mr. Mnisi (Swaziland) said that, as a developing
country, Swaziland believed that the international
community should pay more attention to economic,
social and cultural rights such as the right to life, the
right to food and the right to the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health. Human
development and human rights should reinforce each
other conceptually and in practice in order to secure
the well-being and dignity of all people. A party to
several core human-rights instruments, his country had
enshrined the rights contained in those instruments and
in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights in its
Constitution. Furthermore, Swaziland was currently in
the process of ratifying the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities.
25. Out of its respect for international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and the sovereign
equality of all States, his Government did not
encourage the adoption or implementation of unilateral
measures that were not in accordance with the
international legal framework or with the norms and
principles governing peaceful relations among States.
Swaziland’s recent participation in the universal
periodic review mechanism of the Human Rights
Council had provided an opportunity to assess the
country’s achievements and remaining challenges in
promoting human rights, as well as to share best
practices and continue improving the situation on the
ground.
26. Noting with dismay the casting of undefined
notions such as personal sexual preferences, interests
and behaviours as new human rights whilst
discrimination based on race, gender, religion, creed,
age and disability persisted and required more
attention, he stressed that such notions fell outside the
internationally agreed human rights legal framework
and constituted expressions of disregard for the
universality of human rights. In light of the need to
respect cultural diversity in respect of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, special procedures
mandate-holders should adhere to their respective
mandates and the code of conduct adopted by the
Human Rights Council.
27. Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam) said that his
country highly appreciated the role of the Human
Rights Council as a forum to promote dialogue and
cooperation. The promotion and protection of human
rights were central to his Government’s policy. After
enduring severe trials in order to gain their
independence and secure their basic civil and political
rights, the Vietnamese people aspired to enjoy greater
economic, social and cultural rights and an improved
level of development.
28. Against that backdrop, comprehensive reforms
undertaken over the previous 25 years had brought
about economic growth, significant poverty reduction
and social equity, thereby creating conditions
conducive to the exercise of human rights in general.
Efforts to strengthen the rule of law had led to
improvements in the National Assembly and the legal
system as well as to judicial and administrative reform
of mechanisms mandated to protect the rights of the
citizenry. Moreover, the previous two decades had
witnessed a remarkable expansion in terms of freedom
of the press and, more recently, in the use of
information technology, with Viet Nam moving up ten
levels in the International Telecommunication Union’s
Information and Communication Technology
Development Index.
29. In terms of religious freedom, pursuit of belief
was common in Viet Nam, as reflected by the large
number of religions practised by its people. While a
majority of Vietnamese practised Buddhism and Islam,
Viet Nam had the largest number of Protestants and the
second largest number of Catholics in the region. In the
context of its international cooperation on human
rights, his Government had submitted periodic reports
to a number of treaty bodies, had received severalA/C.3/66/SR.35
11-56636 6
United Nations independent experts and was preparing
for the visit of the Special Rapporteur on the right to
health. As Chairman of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 2010, Viet Nam had
contributed to the work of the recently established
ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human
Rights.
30. Mr. Adoumasse (Benin) said that his Government
had recently adopted two bills that represented
considerable advances in the protection and promotion
of human rights in his country. The first abolished the
death penalty, thus protecting the right to life, and the
second sought to prevent and punish violence against
women. Since its peaceful transition from a totalitarian
regime to a democratic, pluralistic society, his country
had been committed to democracy and promoting and
protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, as
enshrined in its Constitution. Aware of the
interdependence of all human rights, his Government
sought to create an environment that was favourable to
the economic, social and cultural rights of its people
and to improve the living conditions of the Beninese
people by guaranteeing them access to basic
requirements, such as housing, health, food, clothing
and education.
31. Despite the efforts of the international
community, there remained much to be done to ensure
that all individuals fully enjoyed all human rights.
However, some Member States considered civil and
political rights to be more important than economic,
social and cultural rights, forgetting that democracy
rested largely on meeting citizens’ basic needs.
Barriers had been created between the North and the
South, Islam and Christianity, and, more seriously,
between the people and their Government, with civil
society as an intermediary. The culmination of that
fruitless division would, sadly, be gender, with new
concepts of sexual orientation and sexual identity — in
short, undefined sexual rights which were not
considered a priority. Meanwhile, the majority of the
world’s population lived in poverty.
32. The Human Rights Council had been established
as result of the need to depoliticize the human rights
machinery. His delegation reiterated its complete
support for the Council and its attempts to ensure
equality between sovereign States. He thanked the co-
facilitators of the recent review of the Human Rights
Council and called for the financing of the activities of
the Council to be made a priority. His country had been
elected to the Human Rights Council in May 2011 and
would work with all the members to promote human
rights around the world.
33. Although human rights education had advanced
learning in the broadest possible sense, an education
system based on utilitarian paradigms led to
discrimination and marginalization. Human rights
training, on the other hand, was a process built on the
accumulation of knowledge and experience through
activities that shaped attitudes and behaviour. It had a
number of advantages, including a holistic approach
that treated economic, social and cultural rights with
the same importance as civil and political rights, and
allowed for the specific cultural and religious
characteristics of the community to be used to realize
universal principles. His Government had initiated a
human rights training process to reinforce human rights
education to accelerate the dissemination and
appropriation of the fundamental human rights
principles. The primary goal was to train responsible
citizens who were aware of their rights and obligations
to their community.
34. Mr. Acharya (Nepal) said that his Government
was committed to protecting the life, liberty and
property of its people through social inclusion, the rule
of law, the independence of the judiciary and the
elimination of all forms of discrimination, as well as by
ensuring inclusive enjoyment of their economic and
social rights. Nepal’s universal periodic review report
had been considered by the Human Rights Council in
2011. In that connection, he stressed that the principles
and guidelines adopted by the Council in connection
with the review should be applied to all members
fairly, objectively and uniformly.
35. Nepal was a party to 22 international human
rights instruments, including the six core instruments.
It had incorporated their provisions into its 2007
interim Constitution, which established the right to
liberty, equality, justice, education, culture, property,
social justice, information, publication, broadcasting,
the press and privacy, as well as labour, employment,
social security, environmental and health rights, the
rights of women and the rights of the child. It also
included guarantees against exploitation, torture,
discrimination on grounds of race or social status and
exile and, most importantly, it guaranteed the right to
constitutional remedy. The Nepalese Constituent
Assembly, elected in 2008 after the signing of the 2006
Comprehensive Peace Accord, acted as the nation’sA/C.3/66/SR.35
7 11-56636
parliament pending the adoption of a new constitution.
It had adopted a three-year national human rights
action plan and established the necessary policy
framework and institutional mechanisms.
36. He called on the international community to
translate the Declaration on the Right to Development
into reality by eradicating poverty with a view to
ensuring the inclusive, participatory development of all
peoples. His Government had adopted a rights-based
approach to development in order to emphasize the
mutually reinforcing relationship between human
rights, democracy and development.
37. The National Human Rights Commission, a fully
autonomous constitutional body with five regional and
three subregional branches, investigated alleged human
rights violations, monitored compliance with human
rights treaties and made recommendations for the
compensation of victims. The Government was
committed to strengthening the Commission in order to
increase its effectiveness. Nepal’s independent
judiciary was another safeguard of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and its independent media and
civil society organizations played an important
awareness-raising role.
38. The National Women’s Commission, an
autonomous body which conducted investigations and
made recommendations, had submitted its combined
fourth and fifth periodic reports to the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women in
July 2011. The fact that women made up a third of the
601-member Constituent Assembly and that its Deputy
Chairperson was a woman was proof of the
Government’s commitment to the political, economic
and social empowerment of women, including through
affirmative action and capacity-building. The national
action plan for the effective implementation of Security
Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
sought to ensure women’s full, equal participation in
the areas of peace, security and development.
39. The interim Constitution guaranteed the rights of
children, including the right to an identity and to
nurture, basic health care, social security and
protection from physical, mental and other forms of
exploitation with a special focus on conflict victims
and displaced, vulnerable and street children. Nepal
was a party to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Optional Protocols thereto, and its
1992 Children’s Act incorporated most of the rights
established in those instruments. The Government was
also committed to protection and promotion of the
rights of the State’s indigenous minorities, including
the Dalit community, and other marginalized groups. A
national action plan on International Labour
Organization Convention No. 169 (the Indigenous and
Tribal Peoples Convention) was being finalized.
40. The international community must make serious
efforts to protect the rights of migrant workers and
their families; the growing number of incidents of
xenophobia and intolerance were undermining the
rights of those workers in various parts of the world.
Lastly, the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms required not only national
legislative and institutional frameworks, but the
provision of adequate resources. As a least developed
country, Nepal faced serious constraints in that regard
and needed assistance from the international
community.
41. Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) said that a peaceful
future, with development and the full realization of all
human rights for all could only be built on the basis of
full cooperation, solidarity and mutual respect. Respect
for and the defence of people’s right to self-
determination should be the cornerstone of the actions
of the international community. Cultural and religious
diversity and different political, economic and social
systems were the most important source of wealth. Any
attempt to subjugate that wealth by imposing the
Northern countries’ standards and models would
constitute a serious violation of the essence of human
rights.
42. The principles of universality, objectivity,
impartiality and non-selectivity in the human rights
approach continued to be absent from the statements
and actions of some developed countries. While the
Northern countries continued to be selective, the
Southern countries would denounce not only the
human rights violations of which they had been the
victims at the hands of those Northern countries for
centuries, but also all human rights violations that were
committed in Northern countries and territories under
their authority.
43. Liberty and democracy were not exclusively the
heritage of developed countries. With the
commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Declaration on the Right to Development and at a timeA/C.3/66/SR.35
11-56636 8
when the world was facing serious economic and food
crises, it was increasingly important to ensure the right
to development, without which peace and security in
the world would not be possible and democracy would
be mere fiction. The repeated desire to judge and
stigmatize Southern peoples, with a disproportionate
and contrived emphasis on civil and political rights
only sought to consolidate the powerful countries’
economic domination and cultural and ideological
homogenization, facilitated by the monopolistic
domination of the mass media, the manipulation of
international agencies and the imperialist wars of
occupation.
44. His country reiterated its readiness to cooperate
and engage in dialogue on the issue of human rights on
the basis of mutual respect and the norms of
international law, particularly the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It
would continue its fight against manipulation and in
favour of international cooperation on human rights.
Actions to carry out special procedures should be
restricted to the mandate concerned and respect the
Code of Conduct for Special Procedures Mandate-
holders of the Human Rights Council, thus contributing
to the development of cooperation and constructive
dialogue between the experts and Member States. His
delegation expressed its willingness to continue to
cooperate with all special procedures of the Council on
a non-discriminatory basis. Cuba was committed to
defending genuine cooperation, mutual respect, truth,
justice, universality, impartiality and non-selectivity in
the human rights approach.
45. Ms. Hernando (Philippines) said that the
Philippines had played an active role in the drafting of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and that its
Constitution made it State policy to value the dignity of
every human person and guarantee full respect for
human rights. The National Human Rights Action Plan
2009-2014, which sought to mainstream human rights
standards into government plans, programmes and
actions, served as a blueprint for implementation of the
eight international human rights treaties to which the
Philippines was a party and complemented a
comprehensive domestic legal framework in that area.
46. The State’s Magna Carta for Persons with
Disabilities and Magna Carta of Women ensured
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, respectively. Legislation prohibiting the death
penalty had been adopted pursuant to the Second
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, and the Migrant Workers
and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995 had been expanded
in order to strengthen bilateral and multilateral
relations with host countries for the protection of
overseas Filipino workers and provide them with free
skills training and legal assistance with the filing of
claims against abusive employers. Anti-illegal-
recruitment programmes and a National Reintegration
Center for Overseas Filipino Workers had also been
established.
47. In a globalized world, national policies and
actions had international repercussions. Full, effective
implementation of human rights instruments could be
achieved only when domestic efforts were
complemented by bilateral, regional and international
cooperation. Her Government was particularly
concerned about the situation of migrants, especially
migrant domestic workers, and their families. During
the current global economic and financial crises,
migrants were among the first to lose their jobs and,
especially in the case of women and girls, were
increasingly vulnerable to violence and trafficking.
48. Strengthened cooperation among Governments
was vital in promoting and protecting the rights of
migrants, combating human trafficking and eliminating
violence against and exploitation of migrants,
particularly women and girls. She therefore encouraged
States to implement the Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons and to consider
ratifying and enforcing instruments such as the
International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
(the Palermo Protocol).
49. She welcomed the report of the Secretary-General
on the protection of migrants (A/66/253) and concurred
with the latter’s conclusions: States were obliged,
under the core international human rights instruments,
to protect the human rights of all individuals under
their jurisdiction, regardless of their nationality or legal
status, including migrants who were in an irregular
situation; to protect the fundamental human rights of
all migrants in the context of administrative detentionA/C.3/66/SR.35
9 11-56636
and to explore alternatives thereto; and to ensure that
there were adequate protection mechanisms in place to
protect the human rights of migrants. In that
connection, her delegation was proud of its
contribution to the adoption, on 16 June 2011, of
International Labour Organization Convention No. 189
on Decent Work for Domestic Workers.
50. She hoped that there would be further discussion
of the need to promote and protect the human rights of
migrant workers at the second High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development, to be held
by the General Assembly in 2013, and in the work of
international policy platforms such as the Global
Forum on Migration and Development, which
Switzerland would host in December 2011.
51. Ms. AlRasheed (Kuwait) said that her
Government supported the Human Rights Council’s
proposal to raise awareness, promote dialogue between
cultures and religions, and to take measures to combat
intolerance and discrimination in order to consolidate
the culture of peace based on respect for and promotion
of human rights. The Government’s attachment to the
principles of human rights was based on conviction and
a confirmation of Islamic belief, which reflected
religious tolerance and a commitment to achieving
fraternity, equality, peace and justice.
52. Her country was also committed to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including those
affirming the importance of promoting the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of the individual.
Moreover, its Constitution sought to preserve and
promote human rights, emphasizing the achievement of
freedom, justice and equality for all, and granting
citizens the right to expression, education and health
care without discrimination based on origin, gender,
language or religion.
53. Kuwait had joined the Human Rights Council in
2011 and was committed to consolidating the bonds of
cooperation among Member States in order to realize
human rights and fulfil their desired goals. Her
Government renewed its commitment to condemning
all practices and policies that infringed on the human
rights, such as the right to self-determination, of the
Palestinians in their occupied territories, rights which
were being violated by the Israeli occupation forces in
disregard of United Nations resolutions and
recommendations. Noting the report submitted by the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights on
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 (A/66/358),
she condemned all acts of violence committed by
Israeli settlers, whose numbers had significantly
increased in 2011.
54. Ms. Loew (Switzerland) recalled the vast
movement of peaceful protests, particularly in the Arab
world, where people were ready to risk their lives and
face the excessive use of police force and politics of
repression by their own Governments. In fact, that
exercise of the fundamental and interdependent rights
to freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly had long been a common phenomenon
worldwide and should be at the heart of every society.
It was crucial to ensure the freedom of expression in
society without fear of being harmed, harassed,
detained, tortured or killed. Unfortunately, those rights
were being violated to various extents in the world.
55. States had the primary responsibility to protect
the fundamental freedoms of all persons participating
in peaceful protests and to maintain a public space for
dialogue and free expression, while guaranteeing
individual freedoms. When taking public security
considerations into account, States must not abuse
states of emergency or violate international obligations
or national legislation. Any restriction on fundamental
freedoms must abide by the principles of legality and
proportionality and be reduced to a minimum.
56. Peaceful protests were an occasion for
Governments to address their root causes: inequality,
discrimination, corruption, restrictions on effective
participation in public life and other major social
problems. Preventing human rights violations,
particularly those committed in the context of peaceful
protests, was a priority for the Swiss Government, as
evidenced through its initiation of a recent panel
discussion of the Human Rights Council. The human
rights of journalists, human rights defenders and
participants in the protests themselves must be
protected.
57. Mr. Chipaziwa (Zimbabwe) said that his
Government had set up institutions, legislation and
policy frameworks to enhance the promotion of human
rights, to which it was firmly committed in the light of
the human rights violations and denials of fundamental
freedoms that the people of Zimbabwe had endured for
almost a century. It had sought to balance its pursuit
for civil and political rights and socio-economic rights
through legislation seeking to enhance rights in theA/C.3/66/SR.35
11-56636 10
areas of education, labour, health and women’s and
children’s rights.
58. It was of great concern that civil and political
rights had dominated discourse on human rights while
economic, social and cultural rights were being
deliberately sidelined. His Government rejected that
selective approach, which was very detrimental to the
human rights edifice. All human rights were equal,
indivisible and mutually reinforcing, and it was time
for the United Nations to enhance its recognition of the
long-neglected economic and social rights. The
protection of human rights was the primary
responsibility of Governments. Other countries and
non-State actors might offer constructive assistance
and recommendations through dialogue, but without
divisive double standards and unwarranted
politicization of the issues. They should respect the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States, as well as the political,
historical and cultural particularities of each country.
59. His Government rejected the attempts by some
Powers to elevate human rights above those principles
to serve their own interests, using strategies based on
unilateralism, military force, sanctions, name-calling
and shaming through public criticism to promote their
political agendas in targeted countries. The use of
military force to enforce human rights was a dangerous
form of human rights imperialism that fostered the
promotion of human rights mechanisms contrary to the
founding principles and objectives of the United
Nations system. Double standards and hypocrisy in that
regard must be eschewed.
60. His country was also concerned over the
increasing promotion of human rights concepts that
were incompatible with international norms and
practices or the cultural realities in different societies
and absent from the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and other human rights instruments, such as
those relating to sexual orientation and gender identity.
While his Government condemned discrimination or
harm against persons in that respect, it was of concern
that certain countries were trying to force the United
Nations and Governments to devote more effort and
resources in promoting such issues, which were private
matters.
61. Mr. Hoxha (Albania) said that human rights and
support for the United Nations and international law —
and the principles of democracy, fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law — were a core aspect of his
Government’s domestic and foreign policy. The
statement made the previous day by the representative
of Serbia, which referred to events dating back to 1999,
contained false accusations, baseless allegations,
distortions of truth and flawed conclusions. According
to that statement, Kosovo’s problems had begun in
1999, when Serbian domination in Kosovo had come to
an end. The reality was that United Nations bodies had
been adopting a range of documents, including General
Assembly resolutions, on the serious human rights
situation in Kosovo since 1992. In an act of genocide
and ethnic cleansing by the Serbian regime, more than
11,000 Kosovars had been brutally murdered by
Serbian security forces in 1999, and 1 million others
had been forced to flee to other countries within a
week.
62. The General Assembly had welcomed the
advisory opinion of International Court of Justice,
which stated that the Kosovo declaration of
independence did not violate general international law,
an opinion that he hoped Serbia would ultimately
accept and respect. The Serbian representative’s focus
on allegations of organ trafficking and other crimes
committed by Kosovo Albanians had already been
investigated and dropped by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The same
allegations were also set forth in a report that had been
presented to the Council of Europe’s Parliamentary
Assembly, which had adopted a resolution calling for a
new investigation. Although his Government had voted
in favour of the resolution, convinced that the truth was
the only remedy, that report and its allegations of
heinous crimes was unacceptable and did not reflect
reality.
63. Lastly, he invited the Government of Serbia to
fully cooperate in finding and returning the remains of
1,500 Albanians who had gone missing in Serbian
territory and stressed that the technical dialogue
between the Republic of Kosovo and Serbia, being
brokered by the European Union must resume as it was
important for stability and regional cooperation.
64. Ms. Sabja Daza (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
said that the fundamental rights of all Bolivians were
guaranteed in the country’s new Constitution, which
was based on the principles of universality,
non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity. Against
the backdrop of the democratic change unfolding there,
her Government had prepared a national action plan onA/C.3/66/SR.35
11 11-56636
human rights, which adopted a holistic and community
approach to combating discrimination and social
exclusion. That approach was based on the concept of
living well, in direct contrast to the currently dominant
development model in the world, which was based on
capitalist accumulation.
65. While her Government had made great strides
towards fulfilling its human rights obligations under
international law, expressions of discrimination and
racism could still be found in the country. She thus
urged the international community to join her
Government’s efforts in tackling such obstacles and
called for solidarity and cooperation between nations
and cultures to promote rights. To ensure the crucial
human right of safe drinking water and sanitation, her
Government called for renewed political commitment
and cooperation from all countries.
66. With regard to continuing obstacles to the
promotion of human rights globally, she noted that the
United Nations had been manipulated into authorizing
military operations in Libya, allegedly in the interest of
protecting human rights and with the involvement of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and had given
a group of armed insurgents the credentials to represent
the Libyan people, even though they had not been
elected. That must not be allowed to recur. Her
Government hoped that Libya would experience a true
democratic spring and that Colonel Qadhafi’s
murderers would be tried and punished in accordance
with the rule of law.
67. Ms. Tadesse (Ethiopia) said that her country had
undertaken far-reaching measures to advance the full
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in the last 20 years. Its 1995 Constitution recognized
almost all of the key human rights and fundamental
freedoms laid down in the relevant international and
regional human rights instruments. It also had
provisions for the fulfilment of the rights set out in the
International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights
and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and
included specific provisions protecting the rights of
women and children, particularly as regards harmful
traditional practices. Moreover, a number of laws had
been enacted with a view to monitoring the conduct of
law enforcement officials.
68. Her Government had completed and submitted
overdue reports under key international and regional
human rights instruments, including the Conventions
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and on the Rights of the Child.
Moreover, it had undergone a very successful
assessment of its human rights performance under the
universal periodic review and was taking every effort
to implement the recommendations from that review
accordingly.
69. Despite that progress, more needed to be done.
Human rights had frequently served as a cover for
promoting other agendas of certain countries, regional
organizations and activists. Such politicization and
double standards undermined the promotion of human
rights. While she acknowledged that her Government
could do more to consolidate respect for human rights,
it did not introduce legislation for other purposes —
such as for combating terrorism — as an instrument to
undermine democracy and the rule of law, or to
suppress the human rights of its people.
70. Ms. Touzenis (International Organization for
Migration (IOM)) said that all migrants, regardless of
their status, were entitled to enjoy all human rights
without discrimination. The criminalization of irregular
migration weakened the human rights protection of
migrants and created an atmosphere which led to
xenophobic abuses and violence. Likewise, the
administrative detention of migrants should be an
option of last resort for States, and further efforts must
be made in that regard, including providing access to
judicial review and redress. Employment rights such as
those relating to a minimum wage and workplace
safety must be granted regardless of immigration
status, and the children of migrants should have access
to education on a non-discriminatory basis.
71. She welcomed the recommendations made in the
report of the Secretary-General on protection of
migrants (A/66/253). Migrant domestic workers, often
women, worked in gender-segregated sectors involving
care of the home, children or the elderly. The
unregulated and informal nature of such work and their
limited access to support networks offered such
workers little protection from possible exploitation or
abuse. In all such cases, States were obliged not only to
avoid discrimination but also to fulfil their positive
obligations to eliminate all instances of it, such as
through appropriate legislation or workplace inspection
programmes. Lastly, steps must be taken to guarantee
migrant workers’ rights of access to health and
housing, without discrimination.A/C.3/66/SR.35
11-56636 12
72. Mr. Motter (Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU))
said that a recent meeting of the IPU Committee on the
Human Rights of Parliamentarians, which had
examined the situation of 392 parliamentarians in
39 countries, had revealed that members of parliament
were under threat in many parts of the world and that
speaking out entailed a degree of risk, as there had
been a number of cases of murder, torture, death
threats and attempts on their lives. Impunity was also a
major concern.
73. Strengthening the role of parliaments in the
implementation of international human rights norms
hinged on how well parliaments ensured that reporting
procedures — in the Human Rights Council and United
Nations treaty bodies — were connected to national
realities. Parliaments could take a leading role in that
respect, such as by reviewing draft reports, attending
presentations of their country’s reports and ensuring
serious debate on recommendations in that context, to
help ensure that Governments were held accountable
for their human rights performance.
74. To address the lack of adequate preparation of
national reports and awareness of the recommendations
and concluding observations that United Nations
bodies adopted on country situations, his organization
had become increasingly involved in helping
parliaments to make a more substantive contribution to
the international human rights monitoring system,
particularly by assisting them with the implementation
of international recommendations at the national level.
75. Mr. Fiallo (Ecuador) said that his Government’s
major efforts to promote and protect human rights were
evident, for example in its 2008 Constitution. Its
national plan for development and for “living well”
had reinforced Ecuador’s institutional mechanisms for
the protection of the rights of migrants. The
Government promoted the concept of universal
citizenship and had invested significant resources
towards the protection of refugees living in Ecuador. It
had also implemented mechanisms to enable the return
of Ecuadorian migrants who had left the country during
the economic and financial crisis resulting from abuses
based on capitalist doctrines. He urged Member States
to ratify the International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families.
76. Despite the global financial and economic crisis,
his Government had continued to invest in policies
promoting social development. It had set up a human
rights justice mechanism in 2007 to incorporate human
rights as a cross-cutting issue in public policies.
Progress had been made in advancing, inter alia, the
empowerment of women and the rights of children,
peoples and nationalities, and the promotion and
protection of ethnic plurality. The international
community should strive to protect those individual
and collective rights.
77. Human rights discourse was sometimes used to
disguise certain violations of rights, as had been the
case in Libya, where extrajudicial killings and
indiscriminate bombings had taken place. Such actions
should not be allowed to continue or to occur
elsewhere. The Human Rights Council and universal
periodic review were the appropriate mechanisms for
enhancing the human rights situation in the world, in a
spirit of cooperation and free of double standards.
78. Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus), speaking in exercise
of the right of reply, said, in response to the statement
made the previous day by the representative of Turkey,
that the Government of Turkey had made false
accusations and distorted historical facts in an effort to
divert attention from its responsibility for the grave
human rights abuses that it continued to perpetrate in
Cyprus. He noted that numerous General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions had condemned the 1974
Turkish invasion and continuing military occupation of
Cyprus, as had decisions of other bodies such as the
European Court of Human Rights and European
Parliament.
79. Turkish-Cypriots were far from isolated since, as
full citizens of Cyprus, they enjoyed the same rights as
all other European citizens. More than 95 per cent of
that population had renewed their Cypriot passports in
recent years, enabling them to move, work, study and
settle freely anywhere in the Union, and to travel and
enjoy other privileges including consular and
diplomatic assistance worldwide. They could
participate in sports and other activities, were
employed in Cyprus-controlled areas irrespective of
their residence, and, since 2003, as a confidence-
building measure, they had received free medical care
and social insurance in Government-controlled areas.
They had benefited from significant funds earmarked
for their economic development through the European
Union.A/C.3/66/SR.35
13 11-56636
80. In reality, the Turkish army continued to occupy a
significant part of a sovereign country, in flagrant
violation of the core values of the United Nations,
denying hundreds of thousands of Cypriots their
fundamental freedoms and rights. The Government of
Turkey must respect United Nations resolutions, recall
its troops and restore the human rights and dignity of
all the people of Cyprus.
81. Mr. Kodama (Japan), speaking in exercise of the
right of reply, said, in response to the statement by the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (DPRK), that Japan had been facing up to its
past with sincerity and consistency since the Second
World War. He drew attention to the Japan-DPRK
Pyongyang Declaration of 17 September 2002, in
which his Government recognized the damage and
suffering caused to the people of Korea through its
colonial rule in the past and expressed its deep remorse
and heartfelt apology.
82. The figures cited in the statement made by the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea were groundless. On the issue of property
claims, under the Pyongyang Declaration, it had been
agreed that all property claims arising from events
prior to 14 August 1945 could be waived once the
bilateral relationship between the two countries was
normalized. His Government remained committed to
the basic policy of normalizing relations set out in the
Pyongyang Declaration and had been engaged in
addressing those issues. He strongly urged the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take action
to resolve the outstanding issues of concern.
83. Ms. Ivanović (Serbia), speaking in exercise of
the right of reply, said that all the references that the
representative of Albania had made the previous day to
the province of Kosovo and the investigation of crimes
had been based on or quoted from a report on the
investigation into the inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo,
undertaken by the rapporteur of the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly, Mr. Dick Marty, and a report
by the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions to the Human Rights Council
(A/HRC/14/24/Add.9). Paragraphs 32 and 33 of the
latter report indicated, inter alia, that investigations had
been attempted by the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and other entities, including
the Council of Europe and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), but that none of the
efforts to investigate had received meaningful
cooperation from the Government of Albania.
84. Mr. Elshakshuki (Libya), speaking in exercise of
the right of reply, said that comments made by certain
delegations about his country were ill-founded and
revealed ignorance about the sacrifice that the Libyan
people had made, which was an insult to his country.
The comments made by the delegation of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia revealed a lack of
understanding of the scale or effects of the more than
40 years of dictatorship in Libya, where ordinary
citizens had been forced to take up arms. Any defense
of Colonel Qadhafi was absurd.
85. Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea), speaking in exercise of the right of reply, said
that the comments made by the representative of Japan
had been regrettable, as that country continued to
evade its responsibility for the crimes that it had
committed against humanity. Its apology had merely
been misleading lip service for the international
community. The fact was that Japan had committed
systematic and widespread crimes, including the sexual
slavery of 200,000 comfort women. The Government
of Japan should make a further apology and pay
compensation to victims. His Government was willing
to normalize relations once that of Japan was willing to
mend its ways and abandon its current approach.
86. Mr. Nina (Albania), speaking in exercise of the
right of reply, said that the allegations made by the
representative of Serbia had been baseless. The Serbian
Government’s compliance with the requirements of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia after 16 years was insufficient, as the
wounds inflicted by the Serbs still needed to be healed.
Turning the page on the brutalities of the past and
achieving long-lasting peace and reconciliation
required not only that justice be done, but also that
sincere apologies be made to the nations and families
of the victims.
87. His Government extended its support to the
Government of Kosovo for implementing and
strengthening the rule of law and would never yield to
criminals, parallel structures or individuals who cared
only about their own interests. It also welcomed the
support shown by other States and organizations,
including the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) and the European Union. Serbia must allow the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in KosovoA/C.3/66/SR.35
11-56636 14
(EULEX) to operate throughout Kosovo and abolish
the separate parallel mechanisms in the north.
Emphasizing the importance of moving towards a more
integrated region, he noted that a range of common
issues merited further cooperation, including that of the
freedom of movement, which his Government had
recently facilitated by lifting visa restrictions for
Serbian citizens entering Albania.
88. His Government considered the report on the
inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo and the heinous crimes that it
alleged as pure speculation and unfounded accusations.
It had been in the interest of truth that his Government
had invited EULEX to investigate in full and in a
transparent manner all aspects of those allegations
involving any part of Albanian territory.
89. He drew attention to paragraph 34 of the report of
the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions (A/HRC/14/24/Add.9), which
stated that, following the Rapporteur’s visit to Albania
in March 2010, the Minister for Foreign Affairs had
stated that Albania had been willing to cooperate fully
and transparently with investigations into the
allegations of abuse and killings, a commitment which
was a positive step.
90. Mr. Kodama (Japan) said that the
characterization by the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of the apology
made by the Prime Minister of Japan in the joint
Pyongyang Declaration as lip service was
unacceptable. It was also regrettable that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had taken no
action in response to the concerns of the international
community.
91. Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea) said that the remarks made by the
representative of Japan had been another example of
inferior moral quality. Many victims who had been
used as comfort women had already passed away, and
it was immoral for the Government of Japan to
withhold compensation until after the victims died.
That was in stark contrast to the example of other
countries, and he urged Japan to follow their example.
Crimes against humanity had no statutory limit, and
Japan must take responsibility for its shameful actions
in the past.
92. Ms. Ivanović (Serbia) said that the Albanian
Government’s intentions of providing full cooperation
had not been forthcoming, as noted in paragraph 63 of
the report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions (A/HRC/17/28/Add.3).
Furthermore, paragraph 65 of the report, referring to
the allegations of organ trafficking, stated that
reversing the onus of proof was entirely incompatible
with the function of human rights fact-finding and with
the Government’s own responsibility to investigate,
prosecute and punish.
93. Mr. Nina (Albania) said that suggestions that his
Government was not cooperating were deceiving. The
investigation currently under way both in Kosovo and
in Albania was the only way to put an end to the
propaganda spread against his Government, including
in statements made by the delegation of Serbia at the
previous and the current meeting. The fact was that
neither the Governments of Albania or Kosovo,
EULEX nor any other interested party had been
provided with any proof of the allegations, which
remained a form of propaganda intended to destabilize
Kosovo hinder its continued progress and stabilization
and, above all, undermine its growing recognition by
the international community. The ongoing events in
northern Kosovo, including the blockades and
confrontation, were clearly part of the Serbian
Government’s aim to achieve the forceful partition of
Kosovo. It seemed that some in Serbia’s political class
had failed to learn from their own history and that of
the Balkans. He called for cooperation and goodwill on
the part of all parties concerned.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.