United Nations A/C.3/64/SR.41
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-fourth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
24 March 2010
English
Original: French
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
09-60412 (E)
*0960412*
Third Committee
Summary record of the 41st meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 12 November 2009, at 10 a.m.
Chairperson: Mr. Penke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Latvia)
Contents
Agenda item 41: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (continued)A/C.3/64/SR.41
09-60412 2
The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Agenda item 41: Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.52,
L.58 and L.59)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.52: Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
1. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) recalled
that Albania, Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Burundi, Cape Verde, Chile,
the Congo, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Ethiopia, France, Guatemala, Haiti, Ireland,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Montenegro,
Morocco, Panama, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda,
Sierra Leone, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, the United Republic of
Tanzania, the United States of America and Zambia
had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution when it
had been introduced.
3. Mr. Metso (Finland), announcing that Brazil,
Colombia, Greece and Malta had also joined the
sponsors, said that the draft resolution was essentially a
way for the General Assembly to continue supporting
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Each
year, the draft resolution focused on key policy issues,
while matters requiring particular attention by the
General Assembly were included in line with changing
conditions. Work on the draft resolution was
characterized by a genuine commitment to refugees, as
demonstrated by the large number of delegations that
had already joined the sponsors. His delegation
thanked all delegations for the constructive spirit they
had shown during negotiations and was confident that
the Committee would adopt the draft resolution by
consensus.
4. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Comoros,
the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Guinea, Ireland, Israel, Mali, Mauritania,
Mexico, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, the
Russian Federation, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Swaziland, Timor-Leste, Uganda, Ukraine and
Uruguay had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
5. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.52 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.58: Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
6. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.
7. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) recalled
that Afghanistan, Albania, Belarus, Benin and Ecuador
had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution when it
had been introduced.
8. Ms. Klopčič (Slovenia) said that Turkey had
joined the sponsors. The draft resolution took note of
her country’s request, communicated in a letter dated
10 March 2009 from the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (E/2009/47), to become a member of
the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. It
also took note of Economic and Social Council
decision 2009/252, which had been adopted by
consensus. Slovenia, which attached great importance
to the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, stood ready to cooperate
fully with all members of the Executive Committee in
order to find constructive solutions to the challenges
facing the Programme. Her delegation hoped that the
General Assembly would give favourable consideration
to its request and that the draft resolution would be
adopted by consensus.
9. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Bangladesh, Cameroon, Chile, Mali, Morocco, the
Sudan and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
had joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
10. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.58 was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.59: Assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa
11. Ms. Sulimani (Sierra Leone), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.59 on behalf of the Group of
African States, said that Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Greece, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain and Sweden
had joined the sponsors. She drew the Committee’s
attention to the adoption of the African UnionA/C.3/64/SR.41
3 09-60412
Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa on 22 October
2009. Focusing on the fourth preambular paragraph of
the Convention, she requested the international
community to take specific measures to provide
refugees, returnees and displaced persons with the
protection and assistance that they required. Bearing in
mind that a consensus had almost been reached on the
draft resolution during informal consultations, she
called on the participating delegations to join the list of
sponsors. She hoped that the draft resolution would be
adopted by consensus, as the previous text had been at
the sixty-third session of the General Assembly.
12. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the following delegations had joined the sponsors:
Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ireland,
Japan, Latvia, Luxembourg, Montenegro, Norway,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (continued)
(A/C.3/64/L.53)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.53: Inadmissibility of
certain practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
13. Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation),
introducing draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.53 on behalf of
the sponsors, said that Belarus, Benin, Ethiopia,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, Tajikistan and
Turkmenistan had joined the sponsors. With reference
to paragraph 4, he expressed the sponsors’ concern at
the alarming resurgence of extremist groups, in
particular neo-Nazis and skinheads, who committed
acts of targeted violence. Such sacrilegious acts
benefited those who argued in favour of racial purity
and racial discrimination, and gave a deplorable
example to young people. Although the issue assumed
particular importance on the sixty-fifth anniversary of
the victory that marked the end of the Second World
War, the sponsors of the draft resolution were not
calling on the General Assembly to look to the past,
but, rather, to address contemporary manifestations of
racism, which must be combated at the national and
international level. The Russian Federation supported
the activities of the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and, on behalf of
the sponsors of the draft resolution, welcomed his
investigation of the issues referred to in General
Assembly resolution 63/162. The sponsors were
convinced that the adoption of the draft resolution
would make a real contribution towards the elimination
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance.
14. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Côte d’Ivoire and Nigeria had joined the sponsors.
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.54
and L.55)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.54: Global efforts for the
total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
15. Mr. Hassan (Sudan), introducing draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.54 on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
said that the draft resolution introduced each year
related to the guidance given by the General Assembly
to the Human Rights Council on implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action. The sponsors welcomed the outcome of the
Durban Review Conference and underlined the
importance of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.
Acknowledging the leadership role played by the
Human Rights Council with regard to implementation
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
the sponsors requested the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to provide the
Human Rights Council with the necessary resources for
it to achieve its objectives in that regard. They also
encouraged Member States and other relevant
stakeholders to consider implementing the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance. He hoped that the draft resolution would
be adopted by consensus.A/C.3/64/SR.41
09-60412 4
16. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Russian Federation had joined the sponsors.
Draft decision A/C.3/64/L.55: Adoption of the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference
17. Mr. Hassan (Sudan) introduced draft decision
A/C.3/64/L.55 on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
and clarified that it was a draft decision, not a draft
resolution. He said that, in paragraph (b), the words
“the provisions of” had been deleted and the paragraph
should now read: “(b) Decides to endorse the outcome
document of the Conference”. He hoped that the draft
decision would be adopted by consensus.
18. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Russian Federation had joined the sponsors.
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.51, L.56
and L.57)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.51: Universal realization of
the right of peoples to self-determination
19. The Chairperson said that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.
20. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) recalled
that Albania, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), the
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, El Salvador, Kenya, Togo and
Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution when it had been introduced.
21. Mr. Tarar (Pakistan) said that the Central
African Republic, Guinea, Liberia, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Somalia and Uganda had also joined the
sponsors. The right of peoples to self-determination,
which occupied a central place in international law,
was the cornerstone of the Charter of the United
Nations and the International Covenants on Human
Rights, and had been affirmed and reaffirmed by the
United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. The 2005 World Summit Outcome had
also recalled the need to respect the right to self-
determination of peoples under foreign occupation or
colonial or foreign domination. The fact that the draft
resolution had been adopted by consensus every year
since the 1980s both epitomized the General
Assembly’s consistent reaffirmation of the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
served as a reminder that the international community
did not tolerate any act of foreign occupation or
domination. His delegation hoped that the draft
resolution would be adopted, as usual, by consensus.
22. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Burkina Faso, Dominica, Ghana, Grenada,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, the Sudan, Timor-Leste and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the
sponsors of the draft resolution.
23. Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.51 was adopted.
24. Ms. Schlyter (Sweden) speaking in explanation
of vote on behalf of the European Union; the candidate
countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey; the stabilization and
association process country Montenegro; and, in
addition, Iceland, Norway, the Republic of Moldova
and Ukraine, said that, for the European Union, the
right of peoples to self-determination was a
fundamental principle of international law that
remained highly relevant in the current international
context and therefore deserved the closest attention of
the international community. Article 1 of the Charter of
the United Nations clearly illustrated the link between
respect for the principle of self-determination and the
strengthening of universal peace. The right to self-
determination was also firmly established by the
common articles of the International Covenants.
Respect for the right to self-determination was closely
associated with respect for all human rights,
democracy and the rule of law. The European Union
would have welcomed an opportunity for constructive
discussion of the issue, given its importance. It
considered that the main focus of the draft resolution
remained too narrow, that all peoples had the right to
self-determination and that that right should be
exercised in accordance with international law. It
would have preferred the draft resolution to reflect
more clearly the need for the right to self-
determination to be exercised in accordance with
international law. The text also contained inaccuracies.
In particular, the right to self-determination, as
embodied in the International Covenants, was a right of
peoples, not nations. Moreover, it was incorrect to
suggest that self-determination as such was a
precondition for the enjoyment of other fundamental
rights. In addition, the European Union would have
preferred the draft resolution to mention the right of
return. A discussion between the sponsors of the draft
resolution and other interested delegations would allow
the text to be modified; its wording did not reflectA/C.3/64/SR.41
5 09-60412
recent developments on the ground or the general
recommendations and jurisprudence of treaty bodies.
The European Union hoped that the next year’s draft
resolution would be a more effective instrument that
would encourage all States to respect their obligations
in that important area.
25. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that his
country supported the right to self-determination of
peoples still subject to colonial domination or foreign
occupation, and that that right should be interpreted in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, General Assembly
resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2625 (XXV), and other
relevant United Nations resolutions. In the same way,
the Argentine Republic considered that draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.51 should be interpreted and implemented
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Special Committee on
Decolonization, all of which highlighted the special
situation of the Malvinas Islands. Resolution 2065
(XX) of 1965 and subsequent General Assembly
resolutions on the question of the Malvinas Islands, as
well as the resolutions on the same issue adopted by
the Special Committee, expressly recognized the
existence of a sovereignty dispute between the
Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom,
and noted that the way to resolve that dispute was
through the resumption of negotiations with a view to
finding a just, peaceful and lasting solution as soon as
possible, taking into account the interests of the
islanders. Exercising the right to self-determination
presupposed that there was an active subject in the
form of a people subject to alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation, as defined in paragraph 1
of resolution 1514 (XV). Without such a subject, there
was no right to self-determination. The Malvinas
Islands, South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich
Islands and the surrounding maritime areas were
unlawfully occupied by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, which had expelled the
local population and replaced it with its own
population, which meant that the right to self-
determination did not apply to the question of the
Malvinas Islands.
26. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his country had joined the consensus on the draft
resolution because the right of peoples to self-
determination was important. However, he agreed with
the other delegations that had said that the text
contained significant misstatements of international
law and was no longer consistent with current practice.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.56: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
27. The Chairperson noted that the draft resolution
had no programme budget implications.
28. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) recalled
that the following countries had joined the list of
sponsors when the draft resolution had been presented:
Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Belize, Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Croatia, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Gabon, Ghana, Iceland, Italy, Jamaica, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Norway, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland and Uzbekistan.
29. Mr. Attiya (Egypt) noted that Austria, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Chad, Montenegro and New Zealand had
joined the list of sponsors of draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.56. Recalling that the Palestinian people
had been living under Israeli occupation for more than
40 years, he said that he hoped Member States would
demonstrate their solidarity and support by adopting
the draft resolution by consensus, so that the
Palestinian people could exercise their right to self-
determination in their territory and create their own
viable, sovereign and independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
30. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bolivia (Plurinational State of), El
Salvador, Grenada, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Serbia,
Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Ukraine and United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland had
joined the list of sponsors of the draft resolution.
31. Ms. Shahar (Israel) requested that a recorded
vote be taken on the draft resolution.
32. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
speaking in explanation of vote before the voting, said
that his country — which was committed to the
principle of the peaceful coexistence of two States —
provided significant financial support to the Palestinian
Authority, while also supporting the State of Israel. It
was discouraging to see that the text of the draft
resolution was unbalanced, prejudged the outcome of
permanent status issues that should be resolved throughA/C.3/64/SR.41
09-60412 6
bilateral negotiations, and undermined the credibility
of the United Nations.
33. Ms. Shahar (Israel), speaking in explanation of
vote before the voting, recalled that her country had
recently reiterated its desire to reach an agreement
based on the peaceful coexistence of two States and, to
that end, had called for the resumption of negotiations.
Only bilateral negotiations would enable progress to be
made towards that end, and the adoption of one-sided
resolutions that exempted the Palestinian people from
any obligation towards Israel did not serve the cause of
peace. Therefore, Israel would be voting against the
draft resolution.
34. A recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/64/L.56.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Botswana, Cameroon, Canada, Tonga, Vanuatu.
35. The draft resolution was adopted by 171 votes
to 6, with 5 abstentions.1
36. Mr. Quinlan (Australia) said that his country
supported the Palestinian people’s right to
self-determination and was convinced that the only
way to build peace between the Israelis and the
Palestinians was a two-State solution, so he urged the
two sides to resume negotiations. Although Australia
had been a long-time supporter of the draft resolution
at hand, it had abstained from voting after 2004
because it did not agree with the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice mentioned therein.
However, it was now of the opinion that that issue
alone no longer justified such a position, and had voted
in favour of the draft resolution.
37. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina), referring to the
question of the Malvinas Islands, noted that the
exercise of a people’s right to self-determination in a
territory presupposed the existence of a people subject
to alien exploitation and occupation.
38. Mr. Bahreini (Islamic Republic of Iran),
explaining his vote in favour of the draft resolution,
reaffirmed his country’s determination to defend the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination. The essential conditions to a lasting
1
The delegations of Norway and Botswana subsequently
informed the Committee that they had intended to vote in
favour of the draft resolution.A/C.3/64/SR.41
7 09-60412
peace in the region were the end of the occupation, the
return of all Palestinians to their territory, and the
creation of an independent State with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.
39. Mr. Zvachula (Federated States of Micronesia)
said that his country was committed to the principle of
the coexistence of two States and the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination. He
nonetheless criticized several of the provisions in the
preamble of the draft resolution, since they prejudged
the outcome of the negotiations between the two
parties, in particular the reference to the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice. In
addition, paragraph 2 of the text endangered the
impartiality of the United Nations. As a result, the
Federated States of Micronesia had voted against the
draft resolution.
40. Ms. Rasheed (Observer for Palestine) thanked
the around 140 States that had sponsored the draft
resolution and everybody that had voted in favour of it.
Such broad support would be crucial when the
Palestinian people’s right to self-determination, which
had been brutally denied, was finally established. The
statement made by the representative of Israel
warranted no other response than that overwhelming
vote. On the other hand, Israel’s negative vote once
again demonstrated that it rejected any peaceful
solution based on the coexistence of two States and did
not recognize the fundamental rights of the Palestinian
people. However, any negotiation must begin with
mutual recognition by the two parties. The right to self-
determination was an inalienable right of all peoples.
The Israeli refusal to recognize that right for the
Palestinian people was consistent with its policy of
colonizing Palestinian land and the construction of the
separation wall. She wondered what would be left to
negotiate if the expansion of Israeli settlements
continued. She once again urged Israel to stop its
illegal colonization campaigns before the resumption
of negotiations.
41. She questioned the paradoxical position of the
United States — extolling the peaceful coexistence of
two States while continuing to vote against a resolution
that affirmed the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination. The Government of the United
States should review its position on the matter and
consider the message being sent by the international
community. On the other hand, her delegation
welcomed the positive vote from Australia.
42. Only a resolution guaranteeing the rights of both
peoples, including the right to self-determination and
the right to have a State, would pave the way for peace
in the region. The Palestinian people had been fighting
for those rights for 40 years and would never give up.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.57: Use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
43. Ms. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) introduced draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.57 on behalf of its sponsors, to
which the following countries had been added: Benin,
Comoros, Ecuador, El Salvador, Gambia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, South Africa and Swaziland. Referring to
paragraphs 1 to 13 of the draft resolution, she noted
that the authors welcomed the efforts of the Working
Group on the use of mercenaries as a means of
violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right of peoples to self-determination, and
requested that it continue its efforts to strengthen the
international legal framework in order to combat the
phenomenon. Specific proposals must be drawn up to
fill in the gaps and address the threat represented by
mercenaries and private military security services. She
thanked States for their support for that important draft
resolution, which the Committee would decide upon
shortly.
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human
rights (continued)
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
(continued) (A/C.3/64/L.22)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.22: International
Covenants on Human Rights
44. The Chairperson noted that the draft resolution
did not have any programme budget implications.
45. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee) recalled
that the following countries had joined the list of
sponsors when the draft resolution had been presented:
Albania, Armenia, Australia, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Canada, Cape Verde, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, El Salvador, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Malta, Montenegro, Peru, Poland, Republic of
Moldova and Serbia.
46. Ms. Fröberg (Finland) noted that Cape Verde,
Congo and Panama had decided to withdraw their
names from the list of sponsors, and that the followingA/C.3/64/SR.41
09-60412 8
countries had been added to the list: Cyprus, Ecuador,
Georgia, Greece, Israel, Maldives, New Zealand,
Spain, Ukraine and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of). As a result of the informal consultations and
bilateral negotiations with the delegations concerned,
and in order to achieve consensus, she announced the
following oral revisions to the draft resolution: in
paragraph 3, the word “early” had been deleted; in
paragraph 4, the words “with a view to achieving
universal adherence” had been deleted at the end of the
paragraph and inserted after the words “International
Covenants on Human Rights” and the phrase “the
Optional Protocols to them” had been replaced with
“the Optional Protocols thereto”; in paragraph 5, the
phrase “the Optional Protocols to them” had again been
replaced with “the Optional Protocols thereto”; in
paragraph 6, the phrase “and welcomes the reports
submitted by the Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism” had been
deleted; in paragraph 14, the words “urges States
Parties to the respective Optional Protocols to take
duly into account” had been inserted before the words
“the views adopted by the Human Rights Committee”;
in paragraph 15, the beginning of the paragraph had
been revised to read “Takes note with appreciation, in
this regard, of measures”, and at the end of the
paragraph, the phrase “including the adoption by the
Human Rights Committee of a set of proposals to
strengthen its follow-up procedure” had been deleted;
in paragraph 24, after the words “Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights”, the
words “and relevant United Nations entities” had been
inserted, and the words “, including translation” had
been added after the words “other relevant support
services”.
47. The draft resolution had been submitted every
year since 1967 and had always been adopted by
consensus. Finland had been keen to update the text to
take account of the development of the Covenants and
Optional Protocols and the activities of the treaty
bodies. Some delegations seemed upset that their
comments on paragraphs 9 and 10 had not been taken
into consideration, but it had been customary, over the
past 12 years, to take note of the measures that had
been taken by the committees relating to civil and
political rights, and economic, social and cultural
rights, and the authors of the draft resolution had
considered that there was no reason to change that
practice.
48. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that the Dominican Republic had joined the
list of sponsors of the draft resolution, as orally
revised.
49. Ms. Kondolo (Zambia), speaking on behalf of the
Group of African States, thanked the sponsors for
having deleted from paragraph 6 of the draft resolution
the reference to the report of the Special Rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
since the African Group had clearly expressed its
position on the views of that Special Rapporteur,
whose work, moreover, had no connection with the
draft resolution under review. However, it was
regrettable that broader consultations had not been held
on paragraphs 9 and 10, which stated that the General
Assembly welcomed the annual reports of the Human
Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, even though those reports
contained General Comments which some delegations
found problematic. General Comment No. 33 of the
Human Rights Committee on the obligations of States
parties under the Optional Protocol did not establish
clearly the obligations of the States parties to only the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as
opposed to those of States that were also parties to the
Optional Protocol, which might well result in a
violation of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties and establish an unfortunate precedent in
international law.
50. Similarly, General Comment No. 29 of the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
mentioned in paragraph 10 of the draft resolution had
not been submitted to the Economic and Social
Council, thereby violating the Council’s resolution
1985/17. Making reference to that General Comment in
the draft resolution would therefore create an
unprecedented procedural problem. As for General
Comment No. 19 of the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, it did not pose a problem
for the African Group, but there was no need to refer to
it specifically, because, like the other General
Comments, it was included in the Committee’s report.
As the sponsors had not taken into account those
legitimate concerns, the African Group was compelled
to propose oral amendments to the draft resolution.
51. The first was to delete the following passage
from paragraph 9: “takes note of the General
Comments adopted by the Committee, including theA/C.3/64/SR.41
9 09-60412
most recent, General Comment No. 33 on the
obligations of States parties under the Optional
Protocol”.
52. The second was to delete the following passage
from paragraph 10: “and takes note of the General
Comments adopted by the Committee, including the
most recent, General Comment No. 19 on the right to
social security, and General Comment No. 20 on
non-discrimination in economic, social and cultural
rights”.
53. Ms. Fröberg (Finland), recalling that the draft
resolution was the result of a long process of
negotiation in which the sponsors had made enormous
concessions, regretted that the proposed oral
amendments had been presented at such a late stage
and was not convinced by the arguments put forward to
justify them. She requested a recorded vote on each of
the amendments.
54. Explaining her vote before the voting on the first
amendment, she said that the two amendments sent a
strong signal of distrust regarding the independent
work of both Committees. Ever since its fifty-second
session, the General Assembly had been taking note of
the Committees’ General Comments, referring
expressly to the most recent of those comments. That
practice facilitated the implementation of the
Covenants and the Optional Protocols thereto by
drawing the attention of Member States, the United
Nations system and civil society to both the latest
developments observed in the field and the work of
treaty bodies. Although they were not binding, those
General Comments were a useful tool for ensuring that
the rights contained in the Covenants were respected.
Hence, not making reference to them would represent a
huge step backward. Moreover, those General
Comments were not incorporated into the reports of the
Committees, but were only included in an annex.
55. In addition, General Comment No. 33 stated
unambiguously that the second Optional Protocol was
binding only on States that were already parties to the
first Optional Protocol relating to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Since the
General Comments were not binding, they could not
create any precedent in international law. In that
regard, the delegations could have lodged their
reservations a few days earlier during the conference of
States parties to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. Finland would vote against the
proposed amendment.
56. Ms. Sunderland (Canada), explaining her vote
before the voting, regretted that amendments had been
proposed even though the draft resolution had
traditionally been adopted by consensus, particularly
since the paragraphs that were proposed for deletion
merely recaptured the language used in previous years.
Treaty monitoring bodies played a vital role and the
draft resolution merely noted that the General
Assembly welcomed with satisfaction their annual
reports and noted, in a completely neutral manner, the
General Comments they had made over the previous
two years. The sponsors had been very flexible
throughout the negotiations, to the point of even
agreeing to delete any reference to special procedures
mandate holders and their reports. Regretting that a
consensus could not be reached despite those efforts,
she called on delegations to vote against the proposed
amendment.
57. Ms. Sapag (Chile), aligning herself with Finland
and Canada in regretting that there was no consensus,
said that the proposed amendment to paragraph 9 ran
counter to the spirit of the resolution and was a sign of
distrust of the independent experts who made up both
Committees. She called on delegations to maintain the
proposed text in its entirety by voting against the
proposed amendment.
58. Ms. Freedman (United Kingdom), aligning
herself with the comments of Canada, Chile and
Finland said that had the draft resolution referred to the
content of the General Comments, her delegation
would also have wished to take time to consider it
before adopting it. However, that was not the case,
since the text merely indicated that the General
Assembly took note of the General Comments. By
contrast, the proposed amendments passed judgment on
the Committees, thereby undermining their
independence. She would therefore vote against the
proposed amendment and hoped that other delegations
would do likewise.
59. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to paragraph 9 of the draft resolution.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Belarus, Benin, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’sA/C.3/64/SR.41
09-60412 10
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Bhutan, Brazil,
Dominica, Fiji, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Jamaica, Nepal, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Singapore, Suriname,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago.
60. The proposed amendment to paragraph 9 was
adopted by 70 votes to 69, with 25 abstentions.
61. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) said that his delegation
had voted against the first proposed amendment
because the Member States had to take note of the
General Comments of both Committees, whether or not
they appreciated the contents. Adopting that
amendment compromised the independence of the
bodies in question, which was unacceptable.
62. Ms. Kondolo (Zambia) said that the purpose of
the recent conference of States parties to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
had not been to deal with General Comments, and the
African Group had expressed reservations throughout
the consultations, which had not been taken into
consideration.
63. Ms. Fröberg (Finland), recalling her previous
comments, added that General Comment No. 20, which
was only adopted in May 2009, had not been annexed
to the report of the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights. However, that did not hinder the
General Assembly’s ability to take note of it in a
neutral manner in its draft resolution, and not
mentioning it in the draft resolution would mean losing
it altogether. She quoted the first paragraph of the
introduction to the General Comment and said that the
international community had to be able to take note of
such a balanced text on such an important issue.
64. The proposed amendment would also delete any
reference to General Comment No. 19, to which no
Member State had raised any objection.
65. A recorded vote was taken on the proposed
amendment to paragraph 10 of the draft resolution.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, China,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.A/C.3/64/SR.41
11 09-60412
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belize, Bhutan, Brazil, Dominica, Fiji,
Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, India, Nepal, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago.
66. The proposed amendment to paragraph 10 was
rejected by 72 votes to 71, with 23 abstentions.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued) (A/C.3/64/L.26, L.42
and L.43)
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.26: Strengthening the role
of the United Nations in enhancing the effectiveness of
the principle of periodic and genuine elections and the
promotion of democratization
67. Mr. Sammis (United States of America),
introducing draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.26, said that
the following countries had joined the sponsors:
Argentina, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Guatemala,
Honduras, Indonesia, Liechtenstein, Peru, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Switzerland
and United Republic of Tanzania. Free and impartial
elections were the foundation of democracy, allowing
for a free exchange of ideas and public debate.
Providing electoral assistance was an integral part of
the United Nations commitment to supporting
democratic elections in Member States. National,
regional and international observers helped to enhance
the transparency and credibility of elections, and the
provision of technical expertise could improve
electoral processes. The Organization must continue to
provide electoral assistance on a case-by-case basis, in
accordance with the evolving needs of countries that
wished to set up, improve or refine their electoral
processes and institutions. The broad support for
previous resolutions on the issue showed clearly that
the Member States attached great importance to the
role played by the Organization in that area. The
Member States must continue to support the
Organization’s democratization efforts, particularly
with regard to free and fair elections, by adopting the
draft resolution.
68. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Chile, Croatia, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Haiti, Hungary, Italy,
Latvia, Luxembourg, Malawi, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Mongolia, Montenegro, Norway,
Philippines, Seychelles, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and Zambia had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.42: International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
69. Mr. Argüello (Argentina), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.42, said that the following
countries had joined the sponsors: Andorra, Angola,
Cambodia, Chad, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Gabon, Georgia, Haiti, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Mali,
Malta, Mongolia, Nigeria, Panama, Uganda, Vanuatu
and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). It was
gratifying to see that the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance would soon come into force. The text
under review was meant not just to strengthen the
process for ratifying that instrument with a view to
achieving universal adherence, but also to take note of
progress made in that regard. He welcomed the support
the draft had received not only from States parties to
the Convention, but also from States that were not yet
parties to it, and the positive and constructive spirit inA/C.3/64/SR.41
09-60412 12
which the informal consultations had been conducted.
He hoped that the draft resolution, a revised version of
which would be submitted as soon as possible, would
be adopted by consensus.
70. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Bosnia and Herzegovina, Comoros,
Cuba, Ghana, Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
and Swaziland had joined the sponsors.
Draft resolution A/C.3/64/L.43: Protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism
71. Mr. De León Huerta (Mexico), introducing draft
resolution A/C.3/64/L.43 on behalf of the sponsors,
said that Argentina, Brazil, Japan, Monaco, Slovakia
and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) had joined the
sponsors. Adequate measures should be taken at all
levels to combat terrorism, which was a serious
problem for the security of Member States of the
United Nations, but the need for countries to protect
their people could not justify the violation of
fundamental human rights. Protecting and promoting
human rights should be a major focus of all measures
to combat terrorism. Since 2002, when the first draft
resolution on the question was submitted to the
General Assembly, Member States had managed,
despite their differences of opinion and the complexity
of counter-terrorism issues, to put forward a common
programme and to reach consensus. His delegation
commended all delegations for their commitment and
cooperation during the consultations and would
continue the dialogue with them.
72. Mr. Khane (Secretary of the Committee)
announced that Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Cape
Verde, Costa Rica, Croatia, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Malta, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Panama,
Romania, Serbia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia had joined the sponsors.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.