United Nations A/C.3/66/SR.50
GeneralAssembly
Sixty-sixth session
Official Records
Distr.: General
8 February 2012
Original: English
This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the
Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a
copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each
Committee.
11-60408 (E)
1160408
Third Committee
Summary record of the 50th meeting
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 22 November 2011, at 3 p.m.
Chair: Mr. Haniff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)
Contents
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of children (continued)
Agenda item 67: Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and programme of Action (continued)
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-determination (continued)
Agenda item 69: Promotion and protection of human rights (continued)
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving
the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms
(continued)
Agenda item 121: Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Completion of the work of the Third CommitteeA/C.3/66/SR.50
11-60408 2
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Agenda item 65: Promotion and protection of the
rights of children (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.24/Rev.1: The girl child
1. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
2. Mr. von Haff (Angola), speaking on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
said that Algeria, Austria, Brazil, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Indonesia, Ireland, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Thailand and United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland had joined the sponsors.
3. While the draft resolution contained no major
changes from previous versions, it sought to
accommodate language and developments resulting
from the outcome documents of various high-level
meetings held in 2010 and 2011. The current theme
was child-headed households, whose numbers had
recently increased in some regions.
4. In the eighth preambular paragraph, the letter “s”
had been added to the word “Meeting” to make it
plural. In paragraph 19, the words “enact and” had
been inserted immediately after the words “efforts to,”
so that the phrase read “Urges States to ensure that
efforts to enact and implement legislation…”
5. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Barbados, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Egypt, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Honduras, Iceland, Jamaica, Japan, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Lithuania, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Niger, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Slovakia, Suriname, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, United States of
America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan and Vanuatu had joined
the sponsors.
6. Mr. Bené (Observer for the Holy See) said that
his delegation was concerned that the draft resolution
might create a misleading impression that early
pregnancy, per se, constituted a health risk. That was
not supported by the report of the Secretary-General on
the girl child (A/66/257), which limited its
observations to complications arising during childbirth.
In such cases, what was needed was prenatal and post-
natal care for the mother and her child, as enshrined in
article 24 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
especially skilled birth attendants and appropriate
emergency obstetric care.
7. The Holy See welcomed the references to the role
of parents in the draft resolution. Parental priority was
in the best interests of the child, as enshrined in article
26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
article 18 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Without such guarantees, there was little to protect
children from the coercive power of the State.
8. The Holy See reaffirmed its reservations
regarding the draft resolution, in particular concerning
the references to “sexual and reproductive health.” The
Holy See did not consider abortion or abortion services
to be a dimension of such terms. With regard to the
term “family planning,” the Holy See in no way
endorsed contraception or the use of condoms, either as
a family planning measure or to prevent HIV/AIDS.
9. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his country was committed to improving the lives of
women and girls, not only because it was the right
thing to do but also because it was the smart thing to
do. His Government was committed to focusing on the
empowerment of women and girls not only as
beneficiaries but as agents of transformation. His
delegation had sponsored the draft resolution with the
understanding that its reaffirmation of prior documents
applied to those who had initially affirmed them.
10. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.24/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.25/Rev.1: Rights of the
child
11. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
12. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States and all of the sponsors, said that
Switzerland had joined the sponsors. The priority
theme for the current year was the rights of children
with disabilities. The next priority theme would be
indigenous children. Indigenous children were moreA/C.3/66/SR.50
3 11-60408
likely to suffer multiple forms of discrimination and
were in greater need of protection than other children.
13. Reading out oral amendments to draft resolution
A/C.3/66/L.25/Rev.1, he said that in the third line of
the sixth preambular paragraph, after the words
“General Assembly,” the word “and” should be deleted.
In the third line of operative paragraph 1, the word
“the” preceding the words “Optional Protocol” should
be deleted and replaced with “its.” In the same line, the
“s” should be deleted from the end of “Protocols,” and
the word “thereto” should be deleted. In the fourth line,
“its Optional Protocol” should be added after “and.” In
paragraph 2, “aforementioned” should be added in the
sixth line after “the,” and “thereto” should be deleted.
In paragraph 8, the word “and” after the word
“adoption” should be deleted and replaced by the word
“or.” In paragraph 11, after the word “any,” the word
“the” should be deleted. In the fourth line of paragraph
16, after the word “counselling,” the word “and”
should be deleted. In the third line of paragraph 18,
after the word “and,” (before “stresses”), the phrase
“calls for its full implementation” should be added, and
“the importance of the adoption and implementation by
States of appropriate policies in this regard” should be
deleted. In paragraph 19, the word “Also” should be
added before “Reaffirms.” In the first line of paragraph
20, the word “Also” should be deleted and replaced
with “Further.” In the sixth line of paragraph 23, after
“children,” the word “and” should be deleted. In that
same line, the word “recurrent” should be added before
the word “attacks.” In the last line of paragraph 30,
“the” should be deleted and replaced with “its.” In the
fifth line of paragraph 31, “towards” should be deleted
and replaced with “to.” In paragraph 32, the phrase
“building national capacity for improving the living
conditions of children with disabilities in every
country, in particular in developing countries” should
be deleted and replaced with “supporting national
efforts for the realization of the rights of children with
disabilities, recognizing the importance of undertaking
appropriate and effective measures among States that
aims at facilitating and supporting capacity-building,
including through the exchange and sharing of
information, experiences, training programmes and
best practices.” In the fifth line of paragraph 33, after
the word “face,” the phrase “violations of their human
rights as well as” should be added. In the sixth line of
the same paragraph, “as well as violations of their
human rights in all parts of the world” should be
deleted. Paragraph 35 should be deleted and replaced
with the following paragraph: “Reaffirms that the
eradication of poverty is essential to the achievement
of all Millennium Development Goals and to the full
realization of the rights of all children including those
with disabilities and also reaffirms resolution
A/RES/65/1 of 19 December 2010.”
14. Continuing to read out oral revisions, he said that
the new paragraph 35 bis should read as follows:
“Recognizes that the majority of children with
disabilities live in poverty, that mainstreaming
disability issues is an important part of relevant
strategies for sustainable development, and the
importance of equitable access to economic
opportunities and social services for children with
disabilities, as close as possible to their own
communities.” In new paragraph 37 (formerly 36), in
the first line, before “recognizes,” “Also” should be
deleted. In the second line, “and” should be deleted
after the word “communities.” The new paragraph 38
should read as follows: “Recognizes the importance of
preventing the concealment, abandonment, neglect or
segregation of children with disabilities and in this
regard, encourages States to consider the introduction
of a commitment towards replacing institutionalization
with appropriate measures to support family and
community care, and transferring resources to
community-based support services and other forms of
alternative care.” In the new paragraph 40 (formerly
38), the word “also” should be added after
“Recognizes” in the first line. In the second line, after
“education,” “of” should be deleted and replaced with
“for.” In the new paragraph 41 (formerly 39), there
should be a comma after “ensure” and one after
“others.” In the third line of the same paragraph, the
words “with disabilities” should be added after “girls.”
In the third line of the new paragraph 42 (formerly 40),
after “States,” the phrase “under international law,
including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law” should be added. In the
sixth line of the same paragraph, “the” should be
deleted following “by” and “review” should be
changed to “reviewing.” “Of” should be deleted. In the
third line of the new paragraph 43, after “jurisdiction,”
“the” should be added. In the fourth line, “and” should
be deleted after “disabilities.” In the fourth line, after
“in particular,” the phrase “urges all States and
regional integration organizations that have not yet
done so” should be deleted. In the first line of the new
paragraph 43 (a) (formerly 41 (a)) before “to,” the
phrase “Urges all States that have not yet done so”A/C.3/66/SR.50
11-60408 4
should be added. In the third line of that paragraph,
after “priority,” the phrase “and invites regional
integration organizations that have the relevant
competence to do so, as defined in the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, to consider
accession to the Convention” should be added.
15. Continuing with the oral revisions, he said that
the new paragraph 43 (d) (formerly 41 (d)) should
read: “To ensure that children with disabilities have
access to information on their rights, including through
human rights education and training enabling them to
contribute to identifying, preventing and acting upon
violations of their rights.” In the new paragraph 43 (g)
(formerly 41 (g)), the words “General Assembly”
should be added in the first line after the word “in.” In
the first line of the new paragraph 43 (h), (formerly 41
(h)) the word “disaggregate” should be added after
“collect.” In the second line, after “data,” the word
“disaggregated” should be deleted. In new paragraph
43 (i), (formerly 41 (i)), the word “of” should be
deleted in the second line after “living” and replaced
with “for.” In the third line, following “with,”
“universal” should be deleted and replaced with “the
equal.” In the penultimate line, after “to,” the word
“those” should be added and the phrase “children with
disabilities” should be deleted. In the new paragraph 43
(j) (formerly (41 (j)), the words “by law” following
“prohibit” should be deleted. In the second line of the
new paragraph 43 (k) ( formerly 41 (k)), “health-care”
should be changed to “health.” In the third line, “to”
after “and” should be deleted. After the word
“strengthen,” the phrase “the provision of” should be
added. At the end of that line, the word “provisions”
should be deleted. In the last line of the new paragraph
43 (l') (formerly 41 (l)), the word “for” should be
added after “workforce,” and “with a view to” should
be deleted. In the first line of the new paragraph 43 (n)
(formerly 41 (n)), after “develop,” the word “strategies'
should be added and the word “and” should be deleted.
In the second line of the new paragraph 43 (o)
(formerly 41 (o)), the word “of” should be deleted after
“education” and replaced with “for.” In the new
paragraph 43 (q) (formerly 41 (q)) the phrase “on an
equal basis with other children” should be moved from
the third line to the first and placed after the word
“right.” In the second line of the new paragraph 43 (r)
(formerly 41 (r)) following the word “disabilities,” the
words “during and after” should be added and the word
“in” should be deleted. Also in the second line of that
paragraph, the words “risk, including situations of”
should be added after the word “of.” In the sixth line,
after the word “recovery,” the word “and” should be
deleted and the words “and rehabilitation” should be
added after “reintegration.” The original paragraph 44
should be deleted. In paragraph 45, “Takes note with
appreciation” should be replaced with “Recognizes.” In
the same paragraph, the words “Office of” should be
added before “Special Representative.” The words
“and paragraphs 35-37 of resolution 51/77 of 12
December 1996” should be added after the words
“resolution 63/241.” In paragraph 47 (f), following the
word “resolution” in the third line, the phrase “entitled
'Rights of the child' on the rights of indigenous
children” should be replaced with “entitled 'Rights of
the child' on indigenous children.”
The meeting was suspended at 4.00 p.m. and resumed
at 4.20 p.m.
16. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Algeria, Andorra, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Benin,
Burkina Faso, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Guinea, India, Israel, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia,
Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Philippines, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Senegal, Swaziland, Tajikistan,
Tunisia, United States of America, Vanuatu and
Zimbabwe had joined the sponsors.
17. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that his country was
proud to be one of six co-initiators of the 1990 World
Summit for Children, which had provided impetus for
accelerated ratification of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. Pakistan had proposed an amendment to
the draft resolution to go at the very end, as
subparagraph 46 (g). The chapeau for the paragraph
was ‘Decides.’ The new subparagraph (g), would read:
“that all mandate holders should exercise their
functions independently, impartially and in full
observance of their respective mandates.”
18. The proposed amendment enjoyed the support of
a number of delegations, including sponsors, and was
an honest attempt to strengthen the text of the
resolution, reiterating a statement of principle that was
important to include.
19. Mr. Herczyński (Poland) said that the
amendment proposed by Pakistan was not acceptable to
the main sponsors of the draft resolution. Through the
Chair, Pakistan was requested to withdraw its proposal.A/C.3/66/SR.50
5 11-60408
20. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that the proposed
amendment was an important statement of principle.
Regrettably, the request made by the representative of
Poland could not be accommodated.
21. Mr. Herczyński (Poland) requested a recorded
vote on the amendment proposed by Pakistan.
Statements made in explanation of vote before the
voting
22. Ms. Ortigosa (Uruguay) said that the draft
resolution was a compromise consensus text. It was
regrettable that a draft resolution on an issue as
delicate as the rights of children and children with
disabilities could not be adopted by consensus, as it
had been during the previous session. The omnibus
draft resolution was broad and inclusive, and its large
number of sponsors and broad support confirmed that
that focus must be maintained. Her delegation would
vote against the proposed amendments.
23. Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia) reiterated his
delegation’s support for the gist of the draft resolution.
However, his delegation had expected the main
sponsors to take more views into consideration.
References to the Optional Protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child were understood to apply
only to those States which had acceded to them.
24. Ms. Arias (Peru) said that her delegation would
vote against any amendment from the floor, hoping to
maintain the integrity of the text as it stood.
25. Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) said that the
amendment proposed by Pakistan improved the text.
Her delegation would vote in favour of it.
26. Mr. Herczyński (Poland) said that the text of the
draft resolution was the result of extensive discussions
conducted in a very transparent and open manner.
Many delegations had decided whether or not to
sponsor the draft resolution based on the last version
presented to all participating delegations. It would be
deeply disappointing if the draft resolution was not
adopted by consensus, as had been the case for the last
few years. The references to United Nations actors in
the proposed amendment had an admonitory tone and
gave the incorrect impression that mandate holders
were operating outside their mandates. His delegation
would therefore vote against the amendment proposed
by Pakistan.
27. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
as a matter of procedural discipline, his delegation
opposed all amendments from the floor. The proposed
amendment by Pakistan was clearly aimed at one
particular mandate holder. There were other, more
appropriate ways to raise such issues. The draft
resolution should remain focused on the rights of
children with disabilities. The United States of America
would vote against the proposed amendment.
28. Ms. Andrea L.M. Wilson (Jamaica) recalled that
during the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly,
one mandate holder had publicly accused the
Permanent Representative of Jamaica of speaking in a
personal capacity after he delivered a statement
prepared in capital. Her Government therefore
supported the general principle of encouraging
independent, impartial and objective conduct of the
work of mandate holders. Her delegation’s support for
the amendment proposed by Pakistan in no way
diminished its strong support for the rights of the child
or for the draft resolution.
29. At the request of the delegation of Poland, a
recorded vote was taken on the amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.25/Rev.1 proposed by Pakistan.
In favour:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Benin, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
China, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Kuwait, Malaysia, Mauritania, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Hungary,A/C.3/66/SR.50
11-60408 6
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda,
Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uzbekistan,
Zambia.
30. The amendment to A/C.3/66/L.25/Rev.1 proposed
by Pakistan was rejected by 78 votes to 48, with 21
abstentions.
31. Ms. Alsalah (Syrian Arab Republic) said that
since the main focus of the draft resolution was
disabled children, and in view of the situation of
children whose disabilities had resulted from certain
types of munitions used in wars, conflicts and foreign
occupation, her delegation wished to make an oral
amendment mentioning the Geneva Conventions. At
the end of the third preambular paragraph, following
the words “and Members of Their Families” a comma
would be added, followed by the words “and all
Geneva Conventions of 1949,” with a full stop after
“1949.”
32. A few hours earlier, most States represented in
the Committee had called for the defence of human
rights in certain countries. Those same States should
now defend the human rights of children who had been
disabled in wars and armed conflicts, by voting for the
oral amendment just proposed.
Statements made in explanation of vote before the
voting
33. Mr. Sammis (United States of America)
requested a recorded vote on the oral amendment
proposed by the Syrian Arab Republic. His delegation
would vote against the oral amendment, based on
substance and unrelated to other matters currently
before the Third Committee. The third preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution was agreed language
from the previous year. The oral amendment proposed
by the Syrian Arab Republic had been discussed at
length during informal meetings, and it had been
deemed preferable to retain the language of the third
preambular paragraph from the previous year. The
section of the draft resolution on children affected by
armed conflict contained references to the First to
Fourth Geneva Conventions. That was acceptable to
the United States of America. Such issues should be
dealt with in informal consultations and not relitigated
in the plenary.
34. Mr. Herczyński (Poland) said that his delegation
would vote against the oral amendment proposed by
the Syrian Arab Republic to preserve the integrity of
the text, which was the result of extensive
consultations. Many sponsors had chosen to sponsor
the draft resolution based on the text as it stood.
35. At the request of the United States of America, a
recorded vote was taken on the amendment to draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.25/Rev.1 proposed by the Syrian
Arab Republic.
In favour:
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Nicaragua,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen.
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,A/C.3/66/SR.50
7 11-60408
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino,
Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia,
Guinea, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Namibia, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Philippines, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda,
Uzbekistan.
36. The amendment to A/C.3/66/L.25/Rev.1 proposed
by the Syrian Arab Republic was rejected by 78 votes
to 26, with 27 abstentions.
37. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.25/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted.
38. Mr. Bené (Observer for the Holy See) welcomed
the language in the draft resolution calling upon all
States to take measures to prohibit the forced abortion
and sterilization of children on grounds of disability. It
was important not only as a matter of non-
discrimination, but primarily because such practices
constituted human rights violations. His delegation was
dismayed that proposed language prohibiting such
practices by law had not been accepted by all
delegations.
39. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
affirmed that everyone had the right to life, liberty and
security of person; that no one should be subjected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment; that everyone had the right to recognition
everywhere as a person before law; and that all were
equal before the law and were entitled without any
discrimination to equal protection of the law. Those
foundational human rights principles must be taken
fully into account and implemented by all
Governments.
40. His delegation stressed its reservations about
references to “sexual and reproductive health” in the
draft resolution. It was also dismayed that some
delegations would not reject discrimination against
children on the basis of disability during their prenatal
development, when they were most threatened. The
Convention on the Rights of the Child explicitly
affirmed that children needed special safeguards and
care, including appropriate legal protection “before as
well as after birth.” Because that language was in the
Preamble of the Convention, it was a constitutive
element of that Convention and was the perspective
through which the rest of the Convention must be
interpreted, including article 1, which defined a child
as every human being below the age of eighteen years,
and article 24 (d), which referred to prenatal and post-
natal health care.
41. States must fully respect the rights,
responsibilities and duties of parents, particularly
whenever children with disabilities were concerned.
42. The Universal Declaration on Human Rights
affirmed parents’ prior right to choose the kind of
education that their children would receive, and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child affirmed
parents’ or legal guardians’ primary responsibility for
the upbringing and development of the child. That
applied not only to education but to all aspects of
children’s development, including the important area of
human sexuality.
43. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that her
country deployed strenuous efforts to care for children
in the framework of a comprehensive national
programme for children, especially those with special
needs. Regrettably, the international community was
not shouldering its responsibilities and including a
specific reference in the draft resolution to the
suffering of children chafing under the yoke of foreign
occupation, especially with regard to the challenges
faced by children with disabilities.
44. Occupying Powers must be urged to provide
protection and care for children under their occupation.
Mines in occupied territories had maimed and disabled
thousands of children. The Syrian Arab Republic
understood the section of the draft resolution on
children affected by armed conflicts to apply in full to
the situation of children under foreign occupation. Her
delegation reserved the right to interpret some
paragraphs of the draft resolution on adoption and
other alternative means of care in a manner that
conformed to national legislation. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict should abide by her mandate andA/C.3/66/SR.50
11-60408 8
not forget the suffering of Syrian children under Israeli
occupation in the occupied Syrian Golan.
45. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his country’s efforts in favour of children with
disabilities included the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act, which mandated programmes and
services and provided support for states and
municipalities in guaranteeing individuals with
disabilities a free and appropriate public education.
The Act supported the education of over 6 million
children and youth and 322,000 toddlers and infants
with disabilities. Over three decades, as a result of the
legislation, many children with disabilities had
received high-quality early interventions that prevented
or reduced future needs for services.
46. The draft resolution did not imply that States
must become parties to instruments to which they were
not party, nor did it imply obligations under human
rights obligations to which they were not party. In
sponsoring the draft resolution, the United States of
America did not recognize any change in treaty,
customary or international law.
47. Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) said that the
main sponsors, the European Union and the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States, had been
incapable of constructive dialogue and had been
unwilling or unable to work with other States to
achieve compromise. A decision had been made to
advance only those issues that were of interest to them,
without taking into account the opinions of other
States. Sponsorship was not only a right but a great
responsibility, and the document would be
implemented not only in the Member States of the
European Union and the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, but worldwide.
48. The Chair suggested that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488, the Committee
should take note of the report of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child (A/66/41), the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography (A/66/228) and the report of the
Secretary-General on the girl child (A/66/257).
49. It was so decided.
Agenda item 67 Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
(continued)
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-
up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.68/Rev.1: Global efforts for
the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
50. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
51. Mr. Cesa (Argentina), speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, said that its members were
steadfastly opposed to racism, colonialism and slavery,
phenomena that had historically affected them.
52. Changes would be made to the draft resolution.
The third preambular paragraph should end after the
word “Standards.” In that paragraph, the final phrase,
which read “and encouraging the Committee to
continue making progress in the discharge of its
mandate,” should be deleted. In the fourth preambular
paragraph, the word “obligations” should be replaced
by the word “commitments.” In the twelfth preambular
paragraph, the phrase “successful realization of
commitments” should be changed to read “successful
realization of primary objectives and commitments.” In
the fifteenth preambular paragraph, the initial phrase
“Welcoming also” should be changed to “Noting.” In
the sixteenth preambular paragraph, the initial phrase,
“Welcoming further “ should be changed to “Taking
note of.” In the seventeenth preambular paragraph,
“Welcoming” should be changed to “Taking note of.”
53. At the end of paragraph 4, the words “in this
regard” should be added. In paragraph 10, the words
“or belief” should be added after the word “religion.”
At the end of paragraph 11, the following passage
should be added: “we affirm further that the
dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority,
hatred, or incitement to racial discrimination, as well
as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts shall
be declared offences punishable by law in accordance
with the international obligations of States and that
those prohibitions are consistent with freedom of
opinion and expression.” Paragraph 24 should read,
“Welcomes the work of the Committee in combatingA/C.3/66/SR.50
9 11-60408
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance on the follow-up to the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance and the measures
recommended to strengthen the implementation of the
Convention as well as the functioning of the
Committee.” In paragraph 42, the following phrase
should be added after the word “concerned”:
“individuals, and the involvement of all concerned
groups of individuals in the design and implementation
of the exercise.” At the end of paragraph 43, the words
“in combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance” should be added.
The same words should be added at the end of
paragraph 45. Paragraph 49 should end with the word
“Action.” The phrase beginning with the word
“including” and running to the end of the paragraph
should be deleted. In paragraph 54, the words “are on
an equal footing with” should be replaced with “have
the same status as.” Paragraph 55 should be deleted. At
the beginning of paragraph 60, the words “Also
welcomes” should be replaced with “Takes note of.”
The phrase which followed, which read “and the high-
level meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”
should be deleted. The phrase “and underlines the
importance of improving their effectiveness” should be
added at the end of the paragraph. Paragraphs 62 and
63 should be merged to form a single paragraph which
would read as follows: “Further to the
recommendation of the Working Group of Experts on
People of African Descent at its tenth session to
proclaim a decade for people of African descent,
encourages the Working Group to develop a
programme of action, including a theme, for adoption
by the Human Rights Council, with a view to
proclaiming a decade for 2013 to 2023.” In paragraph
65, the words “emphasizes the importance” should be
changed to “takes note.” Paragraph 68 should be
changed to read as follows: “Expresses serious concern
at past and recent incidents of racism in sports and
sports events, and, in this context, welcomes efforts of
sports governing bodies to combat racism, including by
pursuing anti-racism initiatives, and by developing and
applying disciplinary codes that apply sanctions for
racist acts.” In paragraph 71, the words” in this regard”
at the end should be changed to “in combating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance.” In paragraph 72, the words “Strongly
recommends” should be changed to “Reiterates its
recommendation.”
54. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that the Russian Federation had joined the sponsors.
Statements made in explanation of vote before the
voting
55. Ms. Furman (Israel) said that in light of her
people’s unique history, Israel had always been a
strong advocate against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. Ten years earlier,
Israel had joined other countries in Durban with high
expectations for cooperation against the plague of
racism. Unfortunately, the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa in
2001 had been hijacked by a small group of States
whose sole purpose in attending the conference had
been to demonize Israel. The majority of States, who
were sincere in their desire to fight racism, had not
spoken up, nor had they rejected the attempts to
politicize the conference. Sadly, the conference in
Durban had been taken over by States who wanted to
attack Israel more than they wanted to fight racism.
The conference became a vehicle for the advancement
of hatred, intolerance, anti-Semitism and intolerance of
the State of Israel. Faced with unabashed hostility in
the conference hall and in the streets of Durban, Israel
had been compelled to withdraw. For that reason, Israel
had not taken part in the Durban Review Conference in
2009 or the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action.
56. The draft resolution contained elements that, on
their own, would have been positive. However, the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action was
contaminated with political paragraphs which should
not have been there in the first place. Therefore, Israel
could not join the consensus. It could do so only if the
draft resolution contained a clear call to implement
only the universal issues that were in the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, dropping the
political paragraphs that had compelled Israel to leave.
57. The Jewish people had fought racism throughout
history, and Israel remained committed to that goal. It
was regrettable that ten years after Durban, the
Member States had yet to find the political will to
rectify the wrongs of the Durban Conference and theA/C.3/66/SR.50
11-60408 10
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. For
those reasons, Israel had called for a recorded vote and
would vote against the draft resolution.
58. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
the deep commitment of the United States of America
to combating racism and discrimination was rooted in
the saddest chapters of the country’s history. While
greatly concerned about speech advocating national,
racial or religious hatred, especially when it included
incitement to violence, his delegation believed that the
best antidotes were robust legal protections against
discrimination and hate crimes, proactive government
outreach to racial and religious groups and vigorous
freedom of expression, rather than bans and
punishments.
59. Following attempts to achieve a constructive
outcome, the United States of America had withdrawn
from the deeply flawed Durban process two years
earlier. The Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action, which unfairly singled out Israel and endorsed
overly broad restrictions on freedom of expression, had
been reaffirmed in its entirety at the outcome of the
Durban Review Conference.
60. The United States of America had supported
declaring 2011 the International Year for People of
African Descent and had worked on important
programmes to combat racism, including special
sessions at the Organization of American States,
bilateral work with Brazil and Colombia and
programming at United States embassies around the
world.
61. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said that during negotiations, the
European Union had aimed to re-establish a clear focus
on the necessary fight against racism; avoid confusing
racism with religious intolerance; ensure conformity
with international law; protect all individuals from
racism, regardless of the community or group to which
they belonged; and recall that States had the primary
responsibility to combat racism.
62. With regard to the primary responsibility of
States and restoring focus on a more correct approach
to the Durban process, the concerns of the European
Union had been met. However, other parts of the draft
resolution introduced restrictions on freedom of
expression that were not in accordance with
international law. The European Union regretted
selective references in the draft resolution to particular
groups, as all individuals should be protected against
racism or discriminatory acts regardless of ethnic,
religious or other identification. References to
intolerance on the basis of religion or belief should not
be part of a resolution on combating racism. The
proposal to declare a United Nations Decade for People
of African Descent needed further consideration.
63. A shorter, more focused resolution might aid in
achieving a clear, non-controversial message. The
Group of 77 and China was requested to rethink the
draft resolution and take a fresh approach. The member
States of the European Union would abstain.
64. Mr. Vigny (Switzerland), speaking also on behalf
of Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, said that during
the current session, the negotiations had been
transparent and inclusive, and many concerns had been
positively accommodated. Iceland, Liechtenstein,
Norway and Switzerland would therefore vote in
favour of the draft resolution, whereas during the
previous session, they had abstained.
65. Ms. Vaz Patto (Portugal) expressed appreciation
of the amendment that reflected divergent views on the
Ad Hoc Committee of the Human Rights Council on
the Elaboration of Complementary Standards and
welcomed improved language on combating incitement
to racial discrimination and its incompatibility with
freedom of expression. It was encouraging that the
sponsors had agreed to postpone for a year
proclamation of a Decade for People of African
Descent. The extra time should be used to develop an
adequate programme of action on combating racism,
discrimination and xenophobia, bearing in mind the
need to avoid a hierarchy of victims.
66. The dynamics of negotiations during the current
session and some remaining concerns on safeguarding
freedom of expression unfortunately prevented her
delegation from voting in favour of the draft
resolution. However, the negotiations seemed to mark
the beginning of a new dialogue on racism in human
rights forums at the United Nations. Differences had
narrowed.
67. At the request of Israel, a recorded vote was
taken on draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.68/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,A/C.3/66/SR.50
11 11-60408
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
68. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.68/Rev.1 was adopted
by 126 votes to 5, with 43 abstentions.
69. Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) supported by
Mr. Fiallo (Ecuador) said that his delegation disagreed
with the elimination of the reference to the
International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their
Families from operative paragraph 49. That was agreed
language from the previous session, and the
Convention was relevant to the fight against
discrimination, racism and xenophobia, as migrants
were one of the groups most affected by the scourge of
racism.
70. The Chair suggested that, in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488, the Committee
should take note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its seventy-
eighth and seventy-ninth sessions (A/66/18) and the
report of the Secretary-General on global efforts for the
total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
(A/66/328).
Agenda item 68: Right of peoples to self-
determination (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.61: The right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
71. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
72. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Andorra, Austria, Bulgaria, Cape Verde,
Chile, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Gambia,
Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta, Monaco, Myanmar,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, South Africa, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania and Uzbekistan had joined the sponsors.
73. Mr. Selim (Egypt) said that Antigua and
Barbuda, Barbados, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Costa Rica, Croatia, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Ghana, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Liberia, Mauritius, New Zealand, Paraguay, Portugal,
Rwanda, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Suriname, Switzerland, Timor-Leste and Zambia had
joined the sponsors. The inalienable right to self-
determination was enshrined in international law andA/C.3/66/SR.50
11-60408 12
international human rights instruments. It was thus not
a gift from the international community to be bestowed
upon those living under colonialism and foreign
occupation. The Palestinian people had been counting
on the support of the international community for six
decades to ensure their right to full enjoyment of self-
determination and put an end to the Israeli occupation
and exploitation of their lands.
74. Adoption of the draft resolution by consensus
would contribute to enabling the Palestinian people to
establish on their land the independent, sovereign and
viable State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its
capital.
Statements made in explanation of vote before the
voting
75. Ms. Furman (Israel) said that history had shown
that peace must be negotiated and could not be
imposed from outside. Only Israelis and Palestinians
sitting together at the negotiating table could make the
difficult compromises necessary to create two States
for two peoples living side by side in peace and
security. Speaking at the United Nations in September,
Prime Minister Netenyahu had issued a clear call to the
Palestinians to start direct bilateral negotiations
immediately, without preconditions. While Israel had
demonstrated its readiness to recognize Palestinian
national aspirations for self-determination, the
Palestinians must also accept that Israel was the
homeland of the Jewish people and recognize the right
of Israelis to live in security and peace.
76. The draft resolution one-sidedly affirmed self-
determination for Palestinians. While it expressed a
general need for resumption of negotiations, it failed to
call on the Palestinians to resume direct bilateral
negotiations with Israel. The draft resolution brought
no direct relief or benefit to the Palestinians. Progress
towards realization of the national aspirations of the
Palestinian people would come only through genuine
negotiations and agreement between the Palestinians
and Israel, not through disingenuous draft resolutions
such as the one currently before the Committee. Israel
had therefore called for a vote and would vote against
the draft resolution.
77. At the request of Israel, a recorded vote was
taken on draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.61.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), United States of America.A/C.3/66/SR.50
13 11-60408
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Haiti, Togo, Vanuatu.
78. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.61 was adopted by
166 votes to 5, with 4 abstentions.*
79. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that he
wished to reaffirm his country's commitment to the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to build a
viable and independent State. Argentina had voted in
favour of the draft resolution, in accordance with the
Government's 2010 recognition of Palestine as a free
and independent State within the 1967 borders and in
line with the outcome of negotiations between the
parties.
80. The decision to recognize the Palestinian State
was a reflection of its commitment to promoting
negotiations that would lead to an end of the conflict,
as well as of its desire to see all peoples live together
peacefully. Argentina likewise reaffirmed its
irrevocable support for Israel's right to be recognized
and to live in peace and security within internationally
recognized boundaries.
81. In accordance with paragraph 1 of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), a people's right to
exercise self-determination applied in cases of alien
subjugation, domination or exploitation. In the absence
of such a precondition no right to self-determination
could be said to exist. The case of the Malvinas Islands
involved the illegal occupation of a part of Argentine
territory by the United Kingdom, which had expelled
the Argentine population and authorities and replaced
them with its own. In consequence, the principle
applicable to the question of the Malvinas Islands was
not self-determination but territorial integrity, as
established by all relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Special Committee on
decolonization, which recognized the conflict as a
special and particular colonial situation involving a
sovereignty dispute between the two parties. A
settlement would therefore require the resumption of
bilateral negotiations to find a just and definitive
solution that took into account the interests of the
islands' inhabitants.
82. Argentina welcomed the adoption of the draft
resolution, which would contribute to the self-
determination the Palestinian people, including their
right to an independent State.
83. Mr. Duddy (United Kingdom), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply to the statement made by
the representative of Argentina, said that his country
had no doubt about its sovereignty over the Falkland
Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich
Islands, as well as the surrounding maritime areas. It
attached great importance to the principle of self-
determination, as set out in Article 1, paragraph 2 of
the Charter of the United Nations and in article 1 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
That principle was the basis of its position on the
Falklands Islands and there could be no negotiations
regarding sovereignty unless and until such time as the
inhabitants so wished.
84. Ms. Rasheed (Observer for Palestine) said that
she wished to thank all of the delegations that had
voted in favour of the draft resolution. The massive
show of support and the near unanimous votes in
favour of the resolution had come at a historic time for
the Palestinian people as they sought to realize their
inalienable right to self-determination.
85. That overwhelming support made it all the more
necessary to reflect on the negative vote cast by Israel,
which had continued to pursue its relentless expansion
of settlements throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. It served as
additional proof that the Israeli Government rejected
the possibility of a peace settlement based on the
principle of two States living side by side in peace and
security. In order for a just peace to be achieved, the
basic right to self-determination had to be mutually
recognized by both parties. That right was not one of
the permanent status issues nor had it ever been. It was
not up for negotiation nor would it ever be, but was an
inalienable right which belonged to all peoples,
including the Palestinian people, who had been
deprived of its enjoyment for far too long.
86. Contrary to the statements made by the Israeli
representative peace would not be secured through the
continued application of illegal Israeli policies in the
Occupied Palestinian Territories. The two-State
solution, which enjoyed broad international support,
was in serious jeopardy as a result of Israel's illegal
policies and practices. Its continued intransigence,
which was evident in its colonization of Palestinian
* The delegation of Algeria subsequently said that it had
intended to vote in favour of the draft resolution.A/C.3/66/SR.50
11-60408 14
lands and its construction of the partition wall, was the
main obstacle to peace.
87. The recognition of an independent Palestinian
State with East Jerusalem as its capital and within the
pre-1967 borders was essential to secure the peace the
Palestinian people yearned for. They would continue to
appeal to the international community to stand with
right above might in their long struggle to end the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian lands and to achieve
their long-overdue right to self-determination.
88. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina), speaking in
exercise of the right of reply to the statement made by
the representative of the United Kingdom, said that, as
stated by Argentina’s Minister for Foreign Affairs at a
meeting of the Special Committee on decolonization
held on 21 June 2011, the Government of Argentina
considered the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands
and South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding
maritime areas to be an integral part of Argentine
national territory. They had been illegally occupied by
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and were the subject of a sovereignty dispute
that had been recognized by a number of international
organizations.
89. The illegal occupation had prompted the United
Nations General Assembly to adopt a series of
resolutions, which recognized the existence of the
sovereignty dispute and called on the two Governments
to resume negotiations in order to find a peaceful
solution to the dispute.
90. The Special Committee on decolonization had
likewise pronounced itself on the matter, most recently
in its resolution of 21 June 2011, as had the General
Assembly of the Organization of American States. His
Government reaffirmed its legitimate rights of
sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia
Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the
surrounding maritime areas, which were an integral
part of Argentina’s territory.
91. The Chair suggested that in accordance with
General Assembly decision 55/488 the Committee
should take note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination (A/66/172).
92. It was so decided.
Agenda item 69 (b) Promotion and protection of
human rights: Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms (continued)
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.34/Rev.1: Human rights
and cultural diversity.
93. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
94. Ms. Astiasaran Arias (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, said that all cultures and civilizations
contributed to the enrichment of humanity. Promoting
and protecting human rights and respecting cultural
diversity was therefore essential to ensuring
international peace and security. On behalf of the 120
members of the Non-Aligned Movement she called for
the support of all delegates in adopting the draft
resolution.
95. Mr. Herczyński (Poland), speaking on behalf of
the European Union, said the European Union attached
great importance to the defense and promotion of
cultural diversity, the manifold ways in which cultures
and groups found expression. Cultural diversity could
be promoted and protected only if human rights and
fundamental freedoms, such as the freedom of
expression, information and communication, as well as
the ability of individuals to choose cultural
expressions, were guaranteed. Media pluralism and
freedom of assembly and of association were essential
for the expression of cultural diversity.
96. While the significance of national and regional
particularities had to be borne in mind, it was the
primary duty of States, regardless of their political,
economic or cultural systems, to promote and protect
human rights and fundamental freedoms. No room
should be left for unacceptable attempts at cultural
relativism. To that end the European Union had
proposed inserting in the text of the draft resolution a
paragraph reaffirming the UNESCO Universal
Declaration on Cultural Diversity, preventing cultural
diversity from being invoked in order to infringe on
human rights guaranteed by international law;
regrettably that proposal could not be accommodated.
97. The European Union was likewise concerned by
the reference made in the draft resolution to universally
accepted human rights, which could be misinterpretedA/C.3/66/SR.50
15 11-60408
to imply the existence of human rights which were not
universal. Its proposals were based on agreed language
adopted in many resolutions within the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council, and it
regretted that the draft text did not reflect any of its
concerns. His delegation therefore requested that a
recorded vote should be taken on the draft resolution.
The Member States of the European Union would vote
against the draft resolution and requested that all
delegations do likewise.
98. At the request of the representative of Poland, a
recorded vote was taken on draft resolution
A/C.3/66/L.34/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Armenia, Serbia.
99. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.34/Rev.1 was adopted
by 118 votes to 52, with 2 abstentions.*
100. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) said that
his country continued to support the promotion of
cultural pluralism, tolerance, cooperation and dialogue
among individuals from different cultures and
civilizations. All Governments were responsible for
protecting the rights and freedoms set out in
international human rights law. The Charter of the
United Nations committed the international community
to cooperate in promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction of race, sex, language or religion.
101. Cultural diversity had played a critical role in the
history of his own country, demonstrating that cultural
diversity could strengthen human rights. There was
concern, however, that the concept of cultural diversity
as put forward in the draft resolution could be misused
to legitimize human rights abuses. Human rights were
universal and respect for them enhanced respect for
diversity. Efforts to promote cultural diversity should
not infringe on the enjoyment of human rights nor
justify limitations on their scope.
* The delegations of India and Paraguay subsequently said
that they had intended to vote in favour of the draft
resolution.A/C.3/66/SR.50
11-60408 16
102. By raising the concept of cultural diversity to the
level of an essential objective while failing to reflect
concerns about its potential misuse, the draft resolution
misrepresented the relationship between cultural
diversity and international human rights law. A more
balanced characterization of cultural diversity and its
relationship with human rights law was presented in
Human Rights Council resolution 1715 on the
promotion of the enjoyment of cultural rights of
everyone and respect for cultural diversity.
103. His country furthermore believed that UNESCO
should not take up initiatives aimed at promoting
intercultural dialogue on human rights. For those and
other reasons his delegation had voted no on the draft
resolution. It likewise strongly endorsed the concerns
raised by the representative of Poland speaking on
behalf of the European Union.
104. Ms. Murillo Ruin (Costa Rica) said that her
delegation had voted in favour of the draft resolution
because her country attached particular importance to
cultural diversity. However, its paragraph 14 could not
be understood to imply an acceptance of cultural
multilateralism, which should be rejected with respect
to human rights. Human rights should be defended as
universal, interdependent and interrelated.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.35/Rev.1: The right to
development.
105. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
106. Ms. Astiasaran Arias (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution, said that China had become a sponsor.
As a result of lengthy informal consultations the
following oral amendments had been proposed: a new
paragraph 18 bis should be inserted to read:
“Recognizing that while development facilitates the
enjoyment of all human rights, the lack of development
may not be invoked to justify abridgment of
internationally recognized human rights”. A new
preambular paragraph 18 ter should be inserted to read:
“Recognizing that Member States should cooperate
with each other in ensuring development and
eliminating obstacles to development, and that the
international community should promote an effective
international cooperation for the realization of the right
to development and the elimination of obstacles to
development, and that lasting progress towards the
implementation of the right to development requires
effective development policies at the national level, as
well as equitable economic relations and a favourable
economic environment at the international level”. Both
paragraphs were derived from paragraph 10 of the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action.
107. In paragraph 10, the comma following the word
“nature” in the penultimate line should be deleted. In
the fourth line of paragraph 35 the words “through
support for” should be replaced with “in support of”.
The paragraph should thus read: “Recalls the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
which entered into force on 3 May 2008, and stresses
the need to take into consideration the rights of persons
with disabilities and the importance of international
cooperation, inter alia, in support of national efforts in
the realization of the right to development.”
108. Mr. Selim (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, said that the full realization
of the right to development and the right of peoples
under foreign occupation and colonial domination to
self-determination, together with respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Member States,
were fundamental to promoting a culture of peace and
establishing friendly relations among nations as set out
in the Charter of the United Nations.
109. The Movement had believed in the importance of
implementing a constructive approach to protecting all
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national
and international levels. Equal treatment should be
given to both civil and political rights and economic,
social and cultural rights, including the right to
development. The Heads of State of the Non-Aligned
Movement had reaffirmed at their fifteenth summit the
need to continue promoting all universally-recognized
human rights through constructive international
dialogue, capacity-building and technical assistance.
They further gave due consideration to the negative
impact of unilateral economic and financial coercive
measures on the realization of the right to
development.
110. Noting the interdependence of countries and the
varying levels of human development worldwide, the
Movement reaffirmed the need for a new global human
order aimed at reversing the growing disparity between
rich and poor through the elimination of poverty, full
and productive employment and social integration. The
global economic crisis had adversely affected
developing countries and represented a serious setback
to the realization of the right to development. It wasA/C.3/66/SR.50
17 11-60408
therefore imperative that the crisis should be addressed
by promoting human development through sustained
economic growth and the elimination of extreme
poverty.
111. The United Nations should prioritize the right to
development through the elaboration of a convention
on the right to development and should mainstream the
right to development in the policies of its specialized
agencies and funds. His delegation regretted that
certain delegations continued to insist on putting the
issue to a vote.
112. Ms. Phipps (United States of America) said that
ways should be considered to make the right to
development a unifying rather than a divisive issue on
the international human rights agenda. Fostering
development continued to be a cornerstone of its
international engagement, and the United States
continued to be the largest donor of foreign
development assistance. A new global development
policy had been announced in September 2011 to guide
its overall development efforts, placing a premium on
broad-based economic growth, democratic governance,
innovations and enduring systems for meeting basic
human needs.
113. Development was a long-term proposition in
which progress depended on the choices made by
political leaders in developing countries. Positive
outcomes could be achieved when leaders governed
responsibly, set in place productive policies and made
investments conducive to development. In the absence
of those preconditions good intentions alone could not
ensure progress.
114. The achievement of development goals should be
fostered by the promotion and protection of human
rights as set out in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Economic development goals and objectives
should be pursued in such a way that the development
and environmental needs of present and future
generations were taken into account. While those
objectives aligned closely with the broader thrust of the
draft resolution on the right to development, the United
States was obliged to request a recorded vote. It would
vote against the draft resolution, as it did not believe
that it reflected consensus on the best approach to
achieving those goals.
115. Resolutions on the right to development should
not include unrelated material on topics that were
being addressed elsewhere. Her country was not
prepared to join the consensus on the possibility of
negotiating a binding international agreement on the
right to development, and could therefore not accept
language in the resolution that contemplated an
international legal standard of a binding nature.
Additional theoretical work was likewise required to
define more clearly the right to development and to
explain how it was a fundamental human right. For
those reasons the draft resolution did not meet the core
concerns of the United States, although it would
continue to engage constructively with the open-ended
working group on the right to development in order to
move forward on that important topic.
116. Mr. Duddy (United Kingdom) said that his
country remained committed to the realization of the
right to development for all individuals and it believed
that the right to development was an integral part of
human rights. It remained a major donor in providing
development assistance in many regions of the world,
with a clear focus on helping the poorest, and it had
clearly demonstrated a profound understanding of the
scale and importance of the right to development. For
that reason his Government had committed itself to
donate 0.7 per cent of its gross domestic product to
official development assistance.
117. It believed, however, that it was the responsibility
of States to create the conditions for the realization of
the right to development. The lack of development in a
particular country should not be used as a pretext to
curtail or limit internationally-recognized human
rights, including political and civil rights. Under the
human rights treaties it was the individual States which
had the responsibility to protect and develop their
citizens, and there was no equivalent obligation
between States.
118. The definition of the right to development was
evolving and it was his country's position that the work
of the open-ended working group on the right to
development did not imply a process leading to an
international legal standard of a binding nature. For
that reason the United Kingdom was unable to vote in
favour of the draft resolution. The right to development
should evolve on a consensual basis avoiding
politicization and should be built on the promotion and
respect for civil, political, economic and cultural
rights.A/C.3/66/SR.50
11-60408 18
119. At the request of the representative of United
States of America, a recorded vote was taken on draft
resolution A/C.3/66/L.35/Rev.1.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Canada, Israel, Netherlands, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Lithuania, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine.
120. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.35/Rev.1 was adopted
by 140 votes to 5, with 28 abstentions.
121. Ms. Burgess (Canada) said that her country
supported the concept of the right to development that
placed the individual at its core as both the main
participant and beneficiary of development. The right
to development was an important bridge between all
human rights, and it was the primary responsibility of
States to ensure the fulfillment of the right to
development.
122. Canada had supported the 1986 Declaration on
the Right to Development and had been actively
engaged in discussions on the issue ever since. It
nevertheless had serious concerns with respect to any
legally-binding instrument. The international
community should focus on developing and sharing
best practices, as well as creating favourable conditions
for individuals to realize their full development
potential rather than seeking to create new legal
obligations. Canada had therefore voted against the
resolution.
Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.38/Rev.1: The right
to food.
123. The Chair said that the draft resolution contained
no programme budget implications.
124. Ms. Astiasaran Arias (Cuba), introducing the
draft resolution, said that Austria, Bahrain, Belgium,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Djibouti, Finland, France, Greece, Guinea-
Bissau, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta,
Mongolia, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Togo, Tuvalu and United Arab Emirates had
joined the sponsors.
125. In the third line of preambular paragraph 14 the
word “massive” should be replaced with “substantial”.
126. While the right to food was recognized in
instruments which had been broadly accepted by the
international community, the achievement of that rightA/C.3/66/SR.50
19 11-60408
remained elusive. The number of people suffering from
hunger had increased dramatically despite the efforts of
States and organizations around the world, with some
925 million people going hungry, primarily in
developing countries.
127. Unless an adequate economic environment was
fostered nationally and internationally it would be
impossible to give adequate priority to what was a
fundamental human right. Organizations, funds and
programmes of the United Nations, as well as
international financial institutions and States, should
take the necessary measures to put an end to the food
crisis and to defend food security.
128. Mr. Gustafik (Secretary of the Committee) said
that Albania, Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Iceland, Japan, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Mali, Mauritania, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, Panama, Philippines, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Tunisia and
Vanuatu had become sponsors.
129. Draft resolution A/C.3/66/L.38/Rev.1 was
adopted.
130. Ms. Phipps (United States of America) said that
her country was pleased to be able to join the
consensus on the draft resolution. Improving global
food security was a key foreign policy objective and
her Government had pledged $3.5 billion over three
years to help partner countries improve their
agricultural value chains. It was committed to
accelerating progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals, including by investing in country
plans to boost agricultural development in order to
reduce by half the number of people living with hunger
by 2015.
131. With regard to language in the resolution
describing a continuing world food crisis, while it was
generally agreed that the world was experiencing
regional food crises and price volatility, her country
and many other Member States did not believe that
there was currently a world food crisis. That view was
supported by organizations such as the Food and
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, which
had issued warnings about high food prices but had
made clear that the world was not facing a global food
crisis. The resolution also omitted the significant role
of conflict and lack of governance in causing regional
food insecurity.
132. Although her country did not agree with the
notion of a global food crisis it did support the
assessment of the crisis in the Horn of Africa, where 13
million people were at risk of starvation. Assistance
totaling $750 million had already reached some 4.6
million people, many of whom would otherwise have
died from hunger and disease.
133. Joining the consensus on the resolution did not
recognize any change in the current state of
conventional or customary international law with
respect to rights related to food. While everyone should
have adequate access to food, the right to food should
not be an enforceable obligation. The reference in the
resolution to the right to food was interpreted in light
of article 2.1 of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in which States
undertook to progressively achieve the full realization
of economic, social and cultural rights to the extent to
which they had assumed those obligations. The
resolution was not to be interpreted as suggesting that
States had any extraterritorial obligations with respect
to the right to food. There was also concern over
references in the resolution to unattributed scientific or
technical statements.
134. By joining the consensus on the resolution her
country highlighted its view that opening markets
through international trade agreements, such as the
Doha Round, could generate the economic growth
necessary to promote development. At the same time
the resolution would in no way undermine or modify
commitments to existing trade agreements or the
mandates of ongoing trade negotiations.
135. The implementation of the World Trade
Organization (WTO) agreement on trade-related
aspects of intellectual property rights (TRIPS)
supported comprehensive approaches to food security
by encouraging policies that enabled countries to use
tools and incentives, including biotechnology, to
promote food security. By joining the consensus on the
resolution the United States supported the continued
implementation of the TRIPS agreement, which
provided for patent and plant variety protection
systems to assist countries in achieving their goals of
food security.
136. Ms. Burgess (Canada) said that her country
supported the progressive realization of the right to
adequate food as a component of the right to an
adequate standard of living. It was therefore pleased toA/C.3/66/SR.50
11-60408 20
be able to join the consensus on the draft resolution but
had certain concerns. In paragraph 28 it wished to note
that there was no established link between the TRIPS
agreement and the concepts of food security and the
right to food. Those issues did not appear in the TRIPS
agreement. That paragraph simply encouraged WTO
members to consider the manner in which they
implemented the TRIPS agreement. It did not suggest
that Member States should make substantive
interpretations of the TRIPS agreement, nor did it
instruct WTO members on how to implement the
agreement. Nothing in the TRIPS agreement prevented
States from pursuing the objectives of the right to food
or to food security.
137. Ms. Fontana (Switzerland) said that her country
was pleased to join the consensus on the draft
resolution. It was, however, disappointed by the
absence of any real negotiations in the Third
Committee and could not therefore join the sponsors. It
appealed for an inclusive negotiating process during
the next session.
Agenda item 121: Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly
138. The Chair reminded the Committee that
paragraph 15 of General Assembly resolution 65/315
had encouraged the Main Committees of the General
Assembly to discuss their working methods at the
sixty-sixth session, and that the Chairs of the Main
Committees had been invited to brief the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the General
Assembly on their discussions. An oral draft report of
the Chair had been prepared and would be circulated to
members once it had been finalized. It would be
presented to the Ad Hoc Working Group during the
sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
Draft proposal A/C.3/66/L.72
139. The Chair invited the Committee to consider its
draft programme of work for the sixty-seventh session
of the General Assembly as contained in document
A/C.3/66/L.72. He would take it that the Committee
wished to adopt its draft programme of work and
transmit it to the General Assembly for approval.
140. It was so decided.
Completion of the work of the Third Committee
141. The Chair said that he wished to thank all the
delegates for their support and for keeping their
statements within the prescribed time limits. Presiding
over the Third Committee had not always been easy,
particularly with respect to the need to conduct
numerous discussions and informal consultations
regarding the order of speakers. Nevertheless good
sense had prevailed and the substantive work of the
Committee had been able to proceed.
142. After an exchange of courtesies in which
Mr. Babadoudou (Benin), Mr. Kimura (Japan),
Ms. Ivanovic (Serbia), Ms. Astiasaran Arias (Cuba)
and Ms. Williams (New Zealand) took part, the Chair
declared that the Third Committee had completed its
work for the main part of the sixty-sixth session.
The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.