Statement by Ms. Zhang Dan, Counselor of the Chinese Delegation, at the 3rd Committee of the 64th Session of the General Assembly on Explanation of Vote before the Vote on Draft Resolution L. 36 (Situation of human rights in Myanmar)_Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN 中文 Home About the Mission Ambassador FU Cong, PR Ambassador GENG Shuang, DPR Welcoming Message Sections of the Mission Contact Us China & UN High-level Exchanges Highlights of the Security Council Economic Affairs and Development Social Development and Human Rights Political Issues of the General Assembly Arms Control and Disarmament Legal Affairs and Treaties Administrative and Budgetary Issues Home > China & UN > Social Development and Human Rights > Human Rights Statement by Ms. Zhang Dan, Counselor of the Chinese Delegation, at the 3rd Committee of the 64th Session of the General Assembly on Explanation of Vote before the Vote on Draft Resolution L. 36 (Situation of human rights in Myanmar) 2009-11-19 16:00 Print New York, 19 November 2009 Mr. Chairman, The Chinese delegation regrets to see that once again a country specific human rights resolution on Myanmar has been submitted in the Third Committee. My delegation believes that constructive dialogue and cooperation represent the only proper way to promote and protect human rights whereas finger pointing and pressure will not help solve differences. The UPR mechanism of the Human Rights Council has already provided an appropriate platform for discussing human rights situation in all countries and it should be fully utilized to promote out dialogue among countries. Submitting country specific resolution to the Third Committee of the GA will make the issue of human rights politicized and is not conducive to genuine cooperation on human rights issue. At the same time, draft resolution L. 36 has failed to reflect in an objective manner the progress achieved by Myanmar in promoting and protecting human rights. In view of the above, China will vote against the draft resolution contained in document A/C.3/64/L.36. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appendix: Address: 350 East 35th Street, Manhattan, New York, NY 10016, USA http://un.china-mission.gov.cn/ Email: chinesemission@yahoo.com Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN ALL RIGHTS RESERVED