Statement by Ms. ZHANG Dan, Counselor of the Chinese Delegation, at the 3rd Committee of the 64th Session of the General Assembly on Explanation of Vote before the Vote on Draft Resolution L.35 (Situation of human rights in DPRK)_Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN 中文 Home About the Mission Ambassador FU Cong, PR Ambassador GENG Shuang, DPR Welcoming Message Sections of the Mission Contact Us China & UN High-level Exchanges Highlights of the Security Council Economic Affairs and Development Social Development and Human Rights Political Issues of the General Assembly Arms Control and Disarmament Legal Affairs and Treaties Administrative and Budgetary Issues Home > China & UN > Social Development and Human Rights > Human Rights Statement by Ms. ZHANG Dan, Counselor of the Chinese Delegation, at the 3rd Committee of the 64th Session of the General Assembly on Explanation of Vote before the Vote on Draft Resolution L.35 (Situation of human rights in DPRK) 2009-11-19 15:00 Print New York, 19 November 2009 Mr. Chairman, Based on the consistent position of opposing country specific resolution on human rights, the Chinese delegation will vote against the draft resolution contained in document A/C.3/64/L.35. The Chinese delegation has always held that countries should seek to solve their differences in the field of human rights through constructive dialogue and cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual respect. We are against using country specific human rights resolutions as a way to exert political pressure on developing countries. The past years have witnessed that instead of producing positive effect on a country's human rights situation, country specific resolutions can only provoke unnecessary confrontations. In the context of the current food crisis and financial crisis, DPRK, as a developing country, is facing serious difficulties in its economic and social development. We welcome the fact that DPRK has strengthened cooperation with relevant organs such as the UNICEF and the WFP, and is ready to submit itself to the Universal Periodic Review of the human rights council. The UPR mechanism of the Human Rights Council represents a good platform for constructive dialogue and cooperation and every country will be reviewed on the basis of openness, transparency and equality. We support the international community in continuing its constructive dialogue and cooperation with DPRK on such a basis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appendix: Address: 350 East 35th Street, Manhattan, New York, NY 10016, USA http://un.china-mission.gov.cn/ Email: chinesemission@yahoo.com Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN ALL RIGHTS RESERVED