Statement by Ms. LIU Lingxiao of the Chinese Delegation at the Third Committee of the 65th Session of the General Assembly on Racism and Self-Determination(Items 66, 67)_Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN 中文 Home About the Mission Ambassador FU Cong, PR Ambassador GENG Shuang, DPR Welcoming Message Sections of the Mission Contact Us China & UN High-level Exchanges Highlights of the Security Council Economic Affairs and Development Social Development and Human Rights Political Issues of the General Assembly Arms Control and Disarmament Legal Affairs and Treaties Administrative and Budgetary Issues Home > China & UN > Social Development and Human Rights > Human Rights Statement by Ms. LIU Lingxiao of the Chinese Delegation at the Third Committee of the 65th Session of the General Assembly on Racism and Self-Determination(Items 66, 67) 2010-11-01 08:00 Print Mr. Chairman, Racism constitutes a serious violation of human rights and as such is a common challenge facing the international community. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights states in Article 1 that “all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights”. Racism goes against this fundamental principle of human rights. It tramples upon such values as equality, freedom and justice and endangers the progress of human civilization and the harmonious development of societies. For many years, the UN has played an active role in eliminating racism. The Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted at the 2001 World Conference against Racism are guiding instruments for the international community’s efforts to combat racism. At the Durban Review Conference held in Geneva in 2009, the Untied Nations reiterated the spirit of the Durban Declaration and put forward many relevant recommendations. China expresses its support and appreciation for the work done by the UN and the relevant human rights agencies in combating racism. Despite the progress made so far in combating racism, the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action has not been satisfactory. In addition to persistent racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance, new forms of racism such as Islam-phobia and neo-Nazism are becoming more pronounced, and racist organizations like the skin-heads are causing more harm. The freedom of speech is often abused to instigate racial and religious hatred. Xenophobia and discrimination against immigrants are on the rise. These are matters of great concern to China. China has always supported and participated in the fight against racism by the international community. We have worked to promote the implementation of the Durban Declaration and we support dialogue on equal footing and harmonious coexistence among different religions and cultures. In our view, the key to the effective implementation of the Durban Declaration lies in strict observance of the “zero intolerance” policy on racism at national and international levels. We call on the international community to enhance cooperation and take effective measures for the total elimination of racism. We call on countries not to provide breeding ground under any pretext for any form of racism and we believe that freedom of speech should not be used as an excuse to incite racial discrimination. Mr. Chairman, The right to self-determination is a sacred political right of all peoples to resist foreign aggression and external interference and defend national sovereignty, independence and dignity. The international community should, in accordance with the UN Charter and relevant principles of the international law, protect and promote the realization of the right to self-determination so as to promote the coordinated progress in the areas of peace, development and human rights. The Chinese delegation supports the Palestinian people in their unremitting struggle for national self-determination. We hope that the international community will play a more active role in promoting a comprehensive and fair solution to the Palestinian question so that durable peace and stability can be achieved in the Middle East at an early date. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appendix: Address: 350 East 35th Street, Manhattan, New York, NY 10016, USA http://un.china-mission.gov.cn/ Email: chinesemission@yahoo.com Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN ALL RIGHTS RESERVED