Statement by Ambassador Wang Min at the Third Committee of the 67th Session of the General Assembly on Human Rights_Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN 中文 Home About the Mission Ambassador FU Cong, PR Ambassador GENG Shuang, DPR Welcoming Message Sections of the Mission Contact Us China & UN High-level Exchanges Highlights of the Security Council Economic Affairs and Development Social Development and Human Rights Political Issues of the General Assembly Arms Control and Disarmament Legal Affairs and Treaties Administrative and Budgetary Issues Home > China & UN > Social Development and Human Rights > Human Rights Statement by Ambassador Wang Min at the Third Committee of the 67th Session of the General Assembly on Human Rights 2012-11-08 17:00 Print Mr. Chairman, The past year witnesses positive developments in international human rights arena, many difficulties and challenges however remain. As globalization goes deeper and the economic crisis continues unabated, the instability and uncertainties in world economic growth have increased. And frequent flare-ups of regional turmoil and hotspots have together made it more difficult to achieve development and realize the rights to survival and development. Serious discrimination based on religion, color, gender and race continues to exist. Incidents of linking terrorism with certain religion and demonizing and defaming certain religion are on the rise. International human rights endeavor continues to be plagued by double standard and politicization. Some countries are keen on criticizing developing countries and interfering in their internal affairs by using human rights as a pretext. Disregarding and trampling on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, they spare no efforts to interfere in other countries' internal affairs in the disguise of protecting civilians and defending human rights. China is deeply concerned about all the above challenges and problems. Mr. Chairman, China views that to tackle the above-mentioned challenges and problems facing international human rights endeavor, the international community must steadfastly implement the following principles: First, firmly adhering to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and refraining from interfering in other countries' internal affairs under the pretext of human rights. Under the current international circumstances, it is of special significance and relevance to abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular such important principles as respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-interference in internal affairs, and to safeguard the authority and role of the United Nations. The international community should respect the path of human rights development and model for safeguarding human rights chosen independently by governments in view of their national conditions. Second, rejecting politicization of and double standard on the issue of human rights and enhancing human rights dialogue and cooperation. Some countries always turn a blind eye to violations of human rights at home, but are keen on pressuring developing countries with country-specific human rights issues and creating confrontation in international human rights arena. This has undermined mutual trust among countries and impeded human rights cooperation. China is firmly opposed to such practice and urges those countries to reflect more on their own record and stop their self-righteous lecturing and finger pointing. China calls on all countries to proceed on the basis of equality and mutual respect, act in the spirit of openness and inclusiveness, seek common ground while shelving differences, and learn from each other's experience so as to make common progress. Third, echoing the calls of developing countries for the right to development and pushing vigorously for the realization of economic, social and cultural rights. The international community should give genuine attention to the rights to survival and development of developing countries as well as their rights to food and health and other economic, social and cultural rights and help them achieve development at an early date. To this end, developed countries should demonstrate political will, honor their ODA commitments, and increase financial and technical support for developing countries instead of focusing on criticizing the human rights situation of developing countries. Fourth, eliminating all forms of discrimination and building a harmonious and inclusive world. Not long ago a video defaming Muslims provoked wide-spread protests. To China, it is a matter of great concern. China stands for dialogue and interaction among civilizations and religions, and for their mutual respect and equality. We are opposed to any action that offends the religious sensitivities of Muslims. States must enforce a "zero tolerance" policy on racism in all its forms and manifestations and must not acquiesce to racism and religious intolerance under the pretext of freedom of expression. Fifth, protecting vulnerable groups to ensure equality and dignity for all. The continuation of global economic crisis has posed greater challenges to social development. Countries should continue to pay attention to vulnerable groups such as women, children, the elderly, people with disabilities, immigrants and the indigenous people and increase efforts to improve their livelihood and protect their rights and interests. China supports the UN in organizing a High-level Meeting on Disability and Development in 2013 and the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples in 2014, and will take an active part in the relevant preparatory work. Sixth, further improving the work of the UN in the field of human rights. The UN Secretariat should effectively implement the principle of equitable geographical distribution and increase the representation of developing countries in the UN human rights bodies. The OHCHR should strengthen dialogue with member states, enhance the objectivity, equitability and transparency of it work and accept the supervision of the Human Rights Council. Special procedures and human rights treaty bodies should strictly abide by the Code of Conduct and carry out activities in strict compliance with their mandates. The core component of human rights system reform should be the GA inter-governmental process on the reform of human rights treaty bodies, where member states can play the leading role and strive for broad consensus. Mr. Chairman, Over the past 30 years of reform and opening up, China's economy has undergone rapid growth with continuous improvement of Chinese people's livelihood and unprecedented achievement of all their rights and fundamental freedom. This is widely witnessed and recognized. The facts prove that only by combining the universal principles of human rights with specific national conditions can an applicable and efficient human rights development strategy be chartered. Only by putting the people's rights to survival and development first and fully safeguarding people's legitimate rights and interests on the basis of rapid and sound social and economic development, can an effective way to improve human rights be found. By following such experiences, Chinese government has found out a human rights development path with Chinese characteristics and attuned to China's national conditions, which not only has brought great benefits to the Chinese people, but also made tremendous contributions to the development of international human rights endeavor. China stands ready to strengthen human rights dialogue and cooperation with other countries on the basis of equality and mutual respect, seek common ground and put aside differences so that we can make progress together. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appendix: Address: 350 East 35th Street, Manhattan, New York, NY 10016, USA http://un.china-mission.gov.cn/ Email: chinesemission@yahoo.com Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN ALL RIGHTS RESERVED