Statement by Amb. Zhang Yishan on the Occasion of Consideration by the Human Rights Committee of the Second Periodic Report of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region on the Implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights_Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN 中文 Home About the Mission Ambassador FU Cong, PR Ambassador GENG Shuang, DPR Welcoming Message Sections of the Mission Contact Us China & UN High-level Exchanges Highlights of the Security Council Economic Affairs and Development Social Development and Human Rights Political Issues of the General Assembly Arms Control and Disarmament Legal Affairs and Treaties Administrative and Budgetary Issues Home > China & UN > Social Development and Human Rights > Human Rights Statement by Amb. Zhang Yishan on the Occasion of Consideration by the Human Rights Committee of the Second Periodic Report of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region on the Implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2006/03/20 2006-03-20 00:00 Print Mr. Chairman, The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region stipulates that the relevant provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that are applicable to Hong Kong remain valid after July 1st, 1997 and are to be implemented through the laws of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. China is not yet a party to the Covenant. Nevertheless, in order to comply fully with the principle of "one country, two systems" and with a view to enabling the Human Rights Committee and the international community to learn about the implementation of the Covenant in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, my government, in accordance with the provisions of the Covenant, transmitted in January of 1999 through the Chinese mission in Geneva to the monitoring organ of the Covenant the initial report on the implementation of the Covenant prepared by the administration of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. That report successfully passed the consideration of the Committee. Last January, the Chinese government once again acted according to the provisions of the Covenant and had the Chinese mission in Geneva transmit to the monitoring organ of the Covenant the second periodic report of the administration of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. This report was again prepared by the Hong Kong administration itself. The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region has sent a delegation headed by Mrs. LAM CHENG Yuet Ngor, Permanent Secretary for Home Affairs, to attend the consideration of the report. Mrs. LAM CHENG Yuet Ngor will present the details of the report and answer any questions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Appendix: Address: 350 East 35th Street, Manhattan, New York, NY 10016, USA http://un.china-mission.gov.cn/ Email: chinesemission@yahoo.com Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN ALL RIGHTS RESERVED