Statement by Ms. LI Xiaomei of the Chinese Delegation at the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly on Agenda Item 70(a): the Implementation of Human Rights Instruments_Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN 中文 Home About the Mission Ambassador FU Cong, PR Ambassador GENG Shuang, DPR Welcoming Message Sections of the Mission Contact Us China & UN High-level Exchanges Highlights of the Security Council Economic Affairs and Development Social Development and Human Rights Political Issues of the General Assembly Arms Control and Disarmament Legal Affairs and Treaties Administrative and Budgetary Issues Home > China & UN > Social Development and Human Rights > Human Rights Statement by Ms. LI Xiaomei of the Chinese Delegation at the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly on Agenda Item 70(a): the Implementation of Human Rights Instruments 2012-10-23 21:00 Print Mr. Chairman, Human rights instruments are important achievements in the international endeavor to promote human rights. The Chinese delegation takes note of the Secretary-General's report under this agenda item, and welcomes the dialogues between treaty body chairpersons with the Third Committee. Over time, treaty bodies are increasing beset with problems such as heavy work load and large backlogs. China welcomes the adoption by the 66th Session of the General Assembly of Resolution A/Res/66/254, and supports the inclusion of treaty body reforms in the GA intergovernmental process. We look forward to working with other delegations to seek the broadest consensus on the issue of reform by taking a step by step approach and through constructive consultations, so as to lay a solid foundation for the healthy development of treaty bodies. China believes that treaty body reform shall promote constructive dialogue between treaty bodies and States parties with a view to ensuring the objectivity and impartiality of the work of treaty bodies and avoiding politicization and selectiveness. Discussions in the reform process within the GA framework should focus on such issues as improving the efficiency of treaty bodies, reducing burdens on States parties, enhancing the role of conferences of States parties, and formulating codes of conduct for treaty body experts, etc. An essential character of the reform process within the framework of the UNGA is its intergovernmental nature. As founders of treaty bodies and main actors in the implementation of treaty obligations, States parties should play the leading role in the reform process. China welcomes advice and recommendations from treaty bodies and other stakeholders, whose participation shall follow provisions of the Resolution and the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. Mr. Chairman, The Chinese government attaches importance to the role of international human rights instruments and has acceded to twenty-six international human rights instruments so far, including the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, the Convention of the Rights of the Child, and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. My government has fulfilled faithfully its obligations under all the human rights treaties it has joined, and has worked hard to make sure that provisions of those treaties be incorporated in our domestic legislative, judicial, and administrative work. China has submitted implementation reports on time as required by relevant treaties to give comprehensive presentations on China's implementation of the treaties. Since the return of Hong Kong and Macao to China, the Chinese government has, under the principle of "One Country, Two Systems", actively supported both Hong Kong and Macao Special Administrative Regions in fulfilling their relevant treaty obligations. This year, the Chinese government submitted its combined seventh and eighth report on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and has started preparation for the sixth report on the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhumane or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Recently the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities considered China's initial report on the implementation of the Convention. In the future, China will take all measures to implement its treaty obligations and strengthen dialogue and cooperation with treaty bodies with a view to further contributing to the international cause of human rights. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appendix: Address: 350 East 35th Street, Manhattan, New York, NY 10016, USA http://un.china-mission.gov.cn/ Email: chinesemission@yahoo.com Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China to the UN ALL RIGHTS RESERVED